   #Pew Research Center Race & Ethnicity » Feed Pew Research Center Race &
   Ethnicity » Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate JSON
   Representation Prism XML Version Plain Text Version

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MVFJNW

   Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World
   Newsletters Press Donate My Account

   Pew Research Center Logo

   Read our research on: Economy | Russia | COVID-19
   Pew Research Center Logo
   ____________________ (BUTTON)

   Research Topics
   All PublicationsMethodsShort ReadsTools & ResourcesExpertsAbout

Topics

   Politics & PolicyInternational AffairsImmigration & MigrationRace &
   EthnicityReligionGenerations & AgeGender & LGBTQ
   Family & RelationshipsEconomy & WorkScienceInternet & TechnologyNews
   Habits & MediaMethodological ResearchFull topic list

Regions & Countries

   Asia & the PacificEurope & RussiaLatin AmericaMiddle East & North
   AfricaNorth AmericaSub-Saharan AfricaMultiple Regions / Worldwide

Formats

   FeaturesFact SheetsVideosData Essays

   Research Topics

Topics

   Politics & PolicyInternational AffairsImmigration & MigrationRace &
   EthnicityReligionGenerations & AgeGender & LGBTQFamily &
   RelationshipsEconomy & WorkScienceInternet & TechnologyNews Habits &
   MediaMethodological ResearchFull topic list

Regions & Countries

   Asia & the PacificEurope & RussiaLatin AmericaMiddle East & North
   AfricaNorth AmericaSub-Saharan AfricaMultiple Regions / Worldwide

Formats

   FeaturesFact SheetsVideosData Essays
   All PublicationsMethodsShort ReadsTools & ResourcesExpertsAboutMy
   Account
   DONATE
   ____________________ (BUTTON)

   Read our research on: Economy | Russia | COVID-19
   Home Research Topics Race & Ethnicity Racial & Ethnic Groups Black
   Americans

   ReportAugust 30, 2022

Black Americans Have a Clear Vision for Reducing Racism but Little Hope It
Will Happen

Many say key U.S. institutions should be rebuilt to ensure fair treatment

   By Kiana Cox and Khadijah Edwards

Many say key U.S. institutions should be rebuilt to ensure fair treatment

   Photo showing visitors at the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in
   Washington, D.C. (Astrid Riecken/picture alliance via Getty Images)
   How we did this
   (BUTTON)

   Pew Research Center conducted this analysis to understand the nuances
   among Black people on issues of racial inequality and social change in
   the United States. This in-depth survey explores differences among
   Black Americans in their views on the social status of the Black
   population in the U.S.; their assessments of racial inequality; their
   visions for institutional and social change; and their outlook on the
   chances that these improvements will be made. The analysis is the
   latest in the Center’s series of in-depth surveys of public opinion
   among Black Americans (read the first, “Faith Among Black Americans”
   and “Race Is Central to Identity for Black Americans and Affects How
   They Connect With Each Other”).

   The online survey of 3,912 Black U.S. adults was conducted Oct. 4-17,
   2021. Black U.S. adults include those who are single-race, non-Hispanic
   Black Americans; multiracial non-Hispanic Black Americans; and adults
   who indicate they are Black and Hispanic. The survey includes 1,025
   Black adults on Pew Research Center’s American Trends Panel (ATP) and
   2,887 Black adults on Ipsos’ KnowledgePanel. Respondents on both panels
   are recruited through national, random sampling of residential
   addresses.

   Recruiting panelists by phone or mail ensures that nearly all U.S.
   Black adults have a chance of selection. This gives us confidence that
   any sample can represent the whole population (see our Methods 101
   explainer on random sampling). Here are the questions used for the
   survey of Black adults, along with its responses and methodology.
   Terminology
   (BUTTON)

   The terms “Black Americans,” “Black people” and “Black adults” are used
   interchangeably throughout this report to refer to U.S. adults who
   self-identify as Black, either alone or in combination with other races
   or Hispanic identity.

   Throughout this report, “Black, non-Hispanic” respondents are those who
   identify as single-race Black and say they have no Hispanic background.
   “Black Hispanic” respondents are those who identify as Black and say
   they have Hispanic background. We use the terms “Black Hispanic” and
   “Hispanic Black” interchangeably. “Multiracial” respondents are those
   who indicate two or more racial backgrounds (one of which is Black) and
   say they are not Hispanic.

   Respondents were asked a question about how important being Black was
   to how they think about themselves. In this report, we use the term
   “being Black” when referencing responses to this question.

   In this report, “immigrant” refers to people who were not U.S. citizens
   at birth – in other words, those born outside the U.S., Puerto Rico or
   other U.S. territories to parents who were not U.S. citizens. We use
   the terms “immigrant,” “born abroad” and “foreign-born”
   interchangeably.

   Throughout this report, “Democrats and Democratic leaners” and just
   “Democrats” both refer to respondents who identify politically with the
   Democratic Party or who are independent or some other party but lean
   toward the Democratic Party. “Republicans and Republican leaners” and
   just “Republicans” both refer to respondents who identify politically
   with the Republican Party or are independent or some other party but
   lean toward the Republican Party.

   Respondents were asked a question about their voter registration
   status. In this report, respondents are considered registered to vote
   if they self-report being absolutely certain they are registered at
   their current address. Respondents are considered not registered to
   vote if they report not being registered or express uncertainty about
   their registration.

   To create the upper-, middle- and lower-income tiers, respondents’ 2020
   family incomes were adjusted for differences in purchasing power by
   geographic region and household size. Respondents were then placed into
   income tiers: “Middle income” is defined as two-thirds to double the
   median annual income for the entire survey sample. “Lower income” falls
   below that range, and “upper income” lies above it. For more
   information about how the income tiers were created, read the
   methodology.
   Bar chart showing after George Floyd’s murder, half of Black Americans
   expected policy changes to address racial inequality, After George
   Floyd’s murder, half of Black Americans expected policy changes to
   address racial inequality

   More than a year after the murder of George Floyd and the national
   protests, debate and political promises that ensued, 65% of Black
   Americans say the increased national attention on racial inequality has
   not led to changes that improved their lives.^1 And 44% say equality
   for Black people in the United States is not likely to be achieved,
   according to newly released findings from an October 2021 survey of
   Black Americans by Pew Research Center.

   This is somewhat of a reversal in views from September 2020, when half
   of Black adults said the increased national focus on issues of race
   would lead to major policy changes to address racial inequality in the
   country and 56% expected changes that would make their lives better.

   At the same time, many Black Americans are concerned about racial
   discrimination and its impact. Roughly eight-in-ten say they have
   personally experienced discrimination because of their race or
   ethnicity (79%), and most also say discrimination is the main reason
   many Black people cannot get ahead (68%).

   Even so, Black Americans have a clear vision for how to achieve change
   when it comes to racial inequality. This includes support for
   significant reforms to or complete overhauls of several U.S.
   institutions to ensure fair treatment, particularly the criminal
   justice system; political engagement, primarily in the form of voting;
   support for Black businesses to advance Black communities; and
   reparations in the forms of educational, business and homeownership
   assistance. Yet alongside their assessments of inequality and ideas
   about progress exists pessimism about whether U.S. society and its
   institutions will change in ways that would reduce racism.

   These findings emerge from an extensive Pew Research Center survey of
   3,912 Black Americans conducted online Oct. 4-17, 2021. The survey
   explores how Black Americans assess their position in U.S. society and
   their ideas about social change. Overall, Black Americans are clear on
   what they think the problems are facing the country and how to remedy
   them. However, they are skeptical that meaningful changes will take
   place in their lifetime.

Black Americans see racism in our laws as a big problem and discrimination as
a roadblock to progress

   Bar chart showing about six-in-ten Black adults say racism and police
   brutality are extremely big problems for Black people in the U.S. today

   Black adults were asked in the survey to assess the current nature of
   racism in the United States and whether structural or individual
   sources of this racism are a bigger problem for Black people. About
   half of Black adults (52%) say racism in our laws is a bigger problem
   than racism by individual people, while four-in-ten (43%) say acts of
   racism committed by individual people is the bigger problem. Only 3% of
   Black adults say that Black people do not experience discrimination in
   the U.S. today.

   In assessing the magnitude of problems that they face, the majority of
   Black Americans say racism (63%), police brutality (60%) and economic
   inequality (54%) are extremely or very big problems for Black people
   living in the U.S. Slightly smaller shares say the same about the
   affordability of health care (47%), limitations on voting (46%), and
   the quality of K-12 schools (40%).

   Aside from their critiques of U.S. institutions, Black adults also feel
   the impact of racial inequality personally. Most Black adults say they
   occasionally or frequently experience unfair treatment because of their
   race or ethnicity (79%), and two-thirds (68%) cite racial
   discrimination as the main reason many Black people cannot get ahead
   today.

Black Americans’ views on reducing racial inequality

   Bar chart showing many Black adults say institutional overhauls are
   necessary to ensure fair treatment

   Black Americans are clear on the challenges they face because of
   racism. They are also clear on the solutions. These range from
   overhauls of policing practices and the criminal justice system to
   civic engagement and reparations to descendants of people enslaved in
   the United States.

Changing U.S. institutions such as policing, courts and prison systems

   About nine-in-ten Black adults say multiple aspects of the criminal
   justice system need some kind of change (minor, major or a complete
   overhaul) to ensure fair treatment, with nearly all saying so about
   policing (95%), the courts and judicial process (95%), and the prison
   system (94%).

   Roughly half of Black adults say policing (49%), the courts and
   judicial process (48%), and the prison system (54%) need to be
   completely rebuilt for Black people to be treated fairly. Smaller
   shares say the same about the political system (42%), the economic
   system (37%) and the health care system (34%), according to the October
   survey.

   While Black Americans are in favor of significant changes to policing,
   most want spending on police departments in their communities to stay
   the same (39%) or increase (35%). A little more than one-in-five (23%)
   think spending on police departments in their area should be decreased.

   Black adults who favor decreases in police spending are most likely to
   name medical, mental health and social services (40%) as the top
   priority for those reappropriated funds. Smaller shares say K-12
   schools (25%), roads, water systems and other infrastructure (12%), and
   reducing taxes (13%) should be the top priority.

Voting and ‘buying Black’ viewed as important strategies for Black community
advancement

   Black Americans also have clear views on the types of political and
   civic engagement they believe will move Black communities forward.
   About six-in-ten Black adults say voting (63%) and supporting Black
   businesses or “buying Black” (58%) are extremely or very effective
   strategies for moving Black people toward equality in the U.S. Smaller
   though still significant shares say the same about volunteering with
   organizations dedicated to Black equality (48%), protesting (42%) and
   contacting elected officials (40%).

   Black adults were also asked about the effectiveness of Black economic
   and political independence in moving them toward equality. About
   four-in-ten (39%) say Black ownership of all businesses in Black
   neighborhoods would be an extremely or very effective strategy for
   moving toward racial equality, while roughly three-in-ten (31%) say the
   same about establishing a national Black political party. And about a
   quarter of Black adults (27%) say having Black neighborhoods governed
   entirely by Black elected officials would be extremely or very
   effective in moving Black people toward equality.

Most Black Americans support repayment for slavery

   Discussions about atonement for slavery predate the founding of the
   United States. As early as 1672, Quaker abolitionists advocated for
   enslaved people to be paid for their labor once they were free. And in
   recent years, some U.S. cities and institutions have implemented
   reparations policies to do just that.

   Most Black Americans say the legacy of slavery affects the position of
   Black people in the U.S. either a great deal (55%) or a fair amount
   (30%), according to the survey. And roughly three-quarters (77%) say
   descendants of people enslaved in the U.S. should be repaid in some
   way.

   Black adults who say descendants of the enslaved should be repaid
   support doing so in different ways. About eight-in-ten say repayment in
   the forms of educational scholarships (80%), financial assistance for
   starting or improving a business (77%), and financial assistance for
   buying or remodeling a home (76%) would be extremely or very helpful. A
   slightly smaller share (69%) say cash payments would be extremely or
   very helpful forms of repayment for the descendants of enslaved people.

   Where the responsibility for repayment lies is also clear for Black
   Americans. Among those who say the descendants of enslaved people
   should be repaid, 81% say the U.S. federal government should have all
   or most of the responsibility for repayment. About three-quarters (76%)
   say businesses and banks that profited from slavery should bear all or
   most of the responsibility for repayment. And roughly six-in-ten say
   the same about colleges and universities that benefited from slavery
   (63%) and descendants of families who engaged in the slave trade (60%).

Black Americans are skeptical change will happen

   Bar chart showing little hope among Black adults that changes to
   address racial inequality are likely

   Even though Black Americans’ visions for social change are clear, very
   few expect them to be implemented. Overall, 44% of Black adults say
   equality for Black people in the U.S. is a little or not at all likely.
   A little over a third (38%) say it is somewhat likely and only 13% say
   it is extremely or very likely.

   They also do not think specific institutions will change. Two-thirds of
   Black adults say changes to the prison system (67%) and the courts and
   judicial process (65%) that would ensure fair treatment for Black
   people are a little or not at all likely in their lifetime. About
   six-in-ten (58%) say the same about policing. Only about one-in-ten say
   changes to policing (13%), the courts and judicial process (12%), and
   the prison system (11%) are extremely or very likely.

   This pessimism is not only about the criminal justice system. The
   majority of Black adults say the political (63%), economic (62%) and
   health care (51%) systems are also unlikely to change in their
   lifetime.

   Black Americans’ vision for social change includes reparations.
   However, much like their pessimism about institutional change, very few
   think they will see reparations in their lifetime. Among Black adults
   who say the descendants of people enslaved in the U.S. should be
   repaid, 82% say reparations for slavery are unlikely to occur in their
   lifetime. About one-in-ten (11%) say repayment is somewhat likely,
   while only 7% say repayment is extremely or very likely to happen in
   their lifetime.

Black Democrats, Republicans differ on assessments of inequality and visions
for social change

   Bar chart showing Black adults differ by party in their views on racial
   discrimination and changes to policing

   Party affiliation is one key point of difference among Black Americans
   in their assessments of racial inequality and their visions for social
   change. Black Republicans and Republican leaners are more likely than
   Black Democrats and Democratic leaners to focus on the acts of
   individuals. For example, when summarizing the nature of racism against
   Black people in the U.S., the majority of Black Republicans (59%) say
   racist acts committed by individual people is a bigger problem for
   Black people than racism in our laws. Black Democrats (41%) are less
   likely to hold this view.

   Black Republicans (45%) are also more likely than Black Democrats (21%)
   to say that Black people who cannot get ahead in the U.S. are mostly
   responsible for their own condition. And while similar shares of Black
   Republicans (79%) and Democrats (80%) say they experience racial
   discrimination on a regular basis, Republicans (64%) are more likely
   than Democrats (36%) to say that most Black people who want to get
   ahead can make it if they are willing to work hard.

   On the other hand, Black Democrats are more likely than Black
   Republicans to focus on the impact that racial inequality has on Black
   Americans. Seven-in-ten Black Democrats (73%) say racial discrimination
   is the main reason many Black people cannot get ahead in the U.S, while
   about four-in-ten Black Republicans (44%) say the same. And Black
   Democrats are more likely than Black Republicans to say racism (67% vs.
   46%) and police brutality (65% vs. 44%) are extremely big problems for
   Black people today.

   Black Democrats are also more critical of U.S. institutions than Black
   Republicans are. For example, Black Democrats are more likely than
   Black Republicans to say the prison system (57% vs. 35%), policing (52%
   vs. 29%) and the courts and judicial process (50% vs. 35%) should be
   completely rebuilt for Black people to be treated fairly.

   While the share of Black Democrats who want to see large-scale changes
   to the criminal justice system exceeds that of Black Republicans, they
   share similar views on police funding. Four-in-ten each of Black
   Democrats and Black Republicans say funding for police departments in
   their communities should remain the same, while around a third of each
   partisan coalition (36% and 37%, respectively) says funding should
   increase. Only about one-in-four Black Democrats (24%) and one-in-five
   Black Republicans (21%) say funding for police departments in their
   communities should decrease.

   Among the survey’s other findings:

   Black adults differ by age in their views on political strategies.
   Black adults ages 65 and older (77%) are most likely to say voting is
   an extremely or very effective strategy for moving Black people toward
   equality. They are significantly more likely than Black adults ages 18
   to 29 (48%) and 30 to 49 (60%) to say this. Black adults 65 and older
   (48%) are also more likely than those ages 30 to 49 (38%) and 50 to 64
   (42%) to say protesting is an extremely or very effective strategy.
   Roughly four-in-ten Black adults ages 18 to 29 say this (44%).

   Gender plays a role in how Black adults view policing. Though
   majorities of Black women (65%) and men (56%) say police brutality is
   an extremely big problem for Black people living in the U.S. today,
   Black women are more likely than Black men to hold this view. When it
   comes to criminal justice, Black women (56%) and men (51%) are about
   equally likely to share the view that the prison system should be
   completely rebuilt to ensure fair treatment of Black people. However,
   Black women (52%) are slightly more likely than Black men (45%) to say
   this about policing. On the matter of police funding, Black women (39%)
   are slightly more likely than Black men (31%) to say police funding in
   their communities should be increased. On the other hand, Black men are
   more likely than Black women to prefer that funding stay the same (44%
   vs. 36%). Smaller shares of both Black men (23%) and women (22%) would
   like to see police funding decreased.

   Income impacts Black adults’ views on reparations. Roughly eight-in-ten
   Black adults with lower (78%), middle (77%) and upper incomes (79%) say
   the descendants of people enslaved in the U.S. should receive
   reparations. Among those who support reparations, Black adults with
   upper and middle incomes (both 84%) are more likely than those with
   lower incomes (75%) to say educational scholarships would be an
   extremely or very helpful form of repayment. However, of those who
   support reparations, Black adults with lower (72%) and middle incomes
   (68%) are more likely than those with higher incomes (57%) to say cash
   payments would be an extremely or very helpful form of repayment for
   slavery.
   Next: 1. Black Americans are pessimistic about their position in U.S.
   society
   ← Prev Page
   You are reading page1Page2Page3Page4Page5Page6Page7Page8
   Next Page →
    1. Black adults in the September 2020 survey only include those who
       say their race is Black alone and are non-Hispanic. The same is
       true only for the questions of improvements to Black people’s lives
       and equality in the United States in the October 2021 survey.
       Throughout the rest of this report, Black adults include those who
       say their race is Black alone and non-Hispanic; those who say their
       race is Black and at least one other race and non-Hispanic; or
       Black and Hispanic, unless otherwise noted. ↩

   [weekly.svg]

Sign up for our weekly newsletter

   Fresh data delivered Saturday mornings
   ____________________
   Sign Up

Report Materials

   Complete Report PDF Topline Questionnaire

Table of Contents

   Black Americans Have a Clear Vision for Reducing Racism but Little Hope
   It Will Happen
   Black Americans see racism in our laws as a big problem and
   discrimination as a roadblock to progressBlack Americans’ views on
   reducing racial inequalityBlack Americans are skeptical change will
   happenBlack Democrats, Republicans differ on assessments of inequality
   and visions for social change
   1. Black Americans are pessimistic about their position in U.S. society
   2. Black Americans’ views on political strategies, leadership and
   allyship for achieving equality 3. Reparations for slavery 4. Black
   Americans’ views on systemic change Acknowledgments Appendix:
   Supplemental tables Methodology

Related

   report | Apr 14, 2022

Race Is Central to Identity for Black Americans and Affects How They Connect
With Each Other

   report | Apr 7, 2022

Black Americans’ Views of and Engagement With Science

   report | Mar 15, 2022

Black Catholics in America

   feature | Mar 25, 2021

Facts About the U.S. Black Population

   report | Mar 25, 2021

The Growing Diversity of Black America

Topics

   Black AmericansEconomic InequalityDiscrimination & PrejudicePoliceRace,
   Ethnicity & PoliticsCriminal Justice

MOST POPULAR

   1
   Key facts about Title 42, the pandemic policy that has reshaped
   immigration enforcement at U.S.-Mexico border

   2
   Quiz: Where do you fit in the political typology?

   3
   Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income
   calculator

   4
   Global population projected to exceed 8 billion in 2022; half live in
   just seven countries

   5
   What the data says about gun deaths in the U.S.

   Pew Research Center
   1615 L St. NW, Suite 800
   Washington, DC 20036
   USA
   (+1) 202-419-4300 | Main
   (+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax
   (+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries
   Research Topics
   Politics & PolicyInternational AffairsImmigration & MigrationRace &
   EthnicityReligionGenerations & AgeGender & LGBTQ
   Family & RelationshipsEconomy & WorkScienceInternet & TechnologyNews
   Habits & MediaMethodological ResearchFull topic list
   Follow Us
   Email Newsletters Facebook Twitter Tumblr YouTube RSS

   About Pew Research Center Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact
   tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends
   shaping the world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic
   research, media content analysis and other empirical social science
   research. Pew Research Center does not take policy positions. It is a
   subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.
   Copyright 2022 Pew Research Center About Terms & Conditions Privacy
   Policy Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy Feedback Careers
