   #search nature.com nature.com

   IFRAME: https://collect.nature.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MRVXSHQ

   Skip to main content

   Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with
   limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend
   you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
   Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we
   are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript.

   Advertisement
   Advertisement

   Nature Communications
     * View all journals
     * Search
     * Log in

     * Explore content
     * About the journal
     * Publish with us

     * Sign up for alerts
     * RSS feed

    1. nature

     nature communications

     articles

     article

   Nationwide geospatial analysis of county racial and ethnic composition
   and public drinking water arsenic and uranium
   Download PDF

   Your article has downloaded

Similar articles being viewed by others

   (BUTTON)

   Carousel with three slides shown at a time. Use the Previous and Next
   buttons to navigate three slides at a time, or the slide dot buttons at
   the end to jump three slides at a time.

Comparison of potential drinking water source contamination across one
hundred U.S. cities

   13 December 2021

   Sean W. D. Turner, Jennie S. Rice, … Landon Marston

A national survey of lead and other metal(loids) in residential drinking
water in the United States

   19 August 2022

   Karen D. Bradham, Clay M. Nelson, … Peter J. Ashley

Guideline levels for PFOA and PFOS in drinking water: the role of scientific
uncertainty, risk assessment decisions, and social factors

   08 January 2019

   Alissa Cordner, Vanessa Y. De La Rosa, … Phil Brown

Drinking water vulnerability in less-populated communities in Texas to
wastewater-derived contaminants

   01 October 2019

   Thuy T. Nguyen & Paul K. Westerhoff

A pilot study on the feasibility of testing residential tap water in North
Carolina: implications for environmental justice and health

   28 June 2021

   Love Odetola, Stephen Sills & Sharon Morrison

Perspectives from the Society for Pediatric Research: contaminants of water
and children’s health: Can we do better?

   29 May 2020

   Kamil Evy A. Bantol, Heather L. Brumberg, … Joyce R. Javier

Measuring the gaps in drinking water quality and policy across regional and
remote Australia

   19 July 2022

   Paul R. Wyrwoll, Ana Manero, … R. Quentin Grafton

Safely managed drinking water services in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea: findings from the 2017 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey

   09 June 2020

   Caetano C. Dorea, Tatjana Karaulac, … Richard Johnston

Characterizing surface water concentrations of hundreds of organic chemicals
in United States for environmental risk prioritization

   30 November 2022

   Risa R. Sayre, R. Woodrow Setzer, … John F. Wambaugh

   Download PDF

     * Article
     * Open Access
     * Published: 03 December 2022

Nationwide geospatial analysis of county racial and ethnic composition and
public drinking water arsenic and uranium

     * Irene Martinez-Morata  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3165-4931^1,
     * Benjamin C. Bostick  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7513-6469^2,
     * Otakuye Conroy-Ben  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8086-1625^3,
     * Dustin T. Duncan^4,
     * Miranda R. Jones^5,
     * Maya Spaur^1,
     * Kevin P. Patterson  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4915-556X^1,
     * Seth J. Prins^4,
     * Ana Navas-Acien^1 &
     * …
     * Anne E. Nigra  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5033-0345^1

   (BUTTON) Show authors

   Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 7461 (2022) Cite this
   article
     * 4448 Accesses
     * 1 Citations
     * 164 Altmetric
     * Metrics details

Subjects

     * Environmental social sciences
     * Risk factors

Abstract

   There is no safe level of exposure to inorganic arsenic or uranium, yet
   recent studies identified sociodemographic and regional inequalities in
   concentrations of these frequently detected contaminants in public
   water systems across the US. We analyze the county-level association
   between racial/ethnic composition and public water arsenic and uranium
   concentrations from 2000–2011 using geospatial models. We find that
   higher proportions of Hispanic/Latino and American Indian/Alaskan
   Native residents are associated with significantly higher arsenic and
   uranium concentrations. These associations differ in magnitude and
   direction across regions; higher proportions of non-Hispanic Black
   residents are associated with higher arsenic and uranium in regions
   where concentrations of these contaminants are high. The findings from
   this nationwide geospatial analysis identifying racial/ethnic
   inequalities in arsenic and uranium concentrations in public drinking
   water across the US can advance environmental justice initiatives by
   informing regulatory action and financial and technical support to
   protect communities of color.

Introduction

   In some US populations, drinking water is a significant source of
   exposure to inorganic arsenic and uranium, which are major
   environmental exposures associated with cancer, cardiovascular disease
   and other adverse health outcomes^1,2,3,4,5,6. Inorganic arsenic (a
   metalloid) is a known human carcinogen, is consistently ranked number
   one on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)/Agency for
   Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s (ATSDR) Substance Priority
   List^7, and is also associated with adverse birth outcomes, diabetes,
   metabolic disease, and cardiovascular disease, even at low- to
   moderate- levels of exposure common in the US population^1,3,4,8. While
   alpha radiation from uranium decay is classified as carcinogenic,
   growing epidemiologic evidence also indicates that uranium exposure is
   associated with chronic kidney disease and is toxic to the respiratory,
   neurologic, and reproductive systems^2,6,9,10. The US Environmental
   Protection Agency (EPA) regulates both arsenic and uranium in US public
   drinking water systems, including community water systems (CWSs) which
   serve over 90% of residents year-round^11. Although the US EPA sets a
   maximum contaminant level (MCL) of 30 µg/L for uranium and 10 µg/L for
   arsenic, EPA’s non-enforceable maximum contaminant level goal for both
   is 0 µg/L because there is no known safe level of exposure to either
   inorganic arsenic or uranium (Denmark and the states of New Jersey and
   New Hampshire set more health-protective arsenic MCLs of 5 µg/L, and
   drinking water providers in the Netherlands adopted a voluntary
   standard of 1 µg/L in 2016)^12,13,14,15.

   Recent studies indicate that both metals are frequently detected in
   CWSs and significant geographic and sociodemographic inequalities in
   CWS concentrations exist across the US^16,17. CWSs reporting the
   highest concentrations of arsenic and/or uranium were those serving
   communities characterized as Hispanic/Latino or American Indian, those
   located in the Central Midwest or Southwest, those serving incarcerated
   populations in the Southwest, and those reliant on
   groundwater^16,17,18,19. Structural racism likely underlies these
   inequalities in drinking water quality; water contaminant exposure
   disparities are driven by a complex, interactive, multilevel system
   structured around the natural (e.g. hydrogeology, climate, soil), built
   (e.g. agriculture, water infrastructure, land-use patterns), and
   sociopolitical (e.g. regulatory policy, historical settlement patterns)
   environments^20,21,22,23,24. These documented disparities in CWS-level
   arsenic and uranium across sociodemographic subgroups underscore the
   need for robust geospatial analyses of community-level racial/ethnic
   composition and drinking water exposures to account for spatial
   dependency in CWS concentrations, which can yield biased effect
   estimates in traditional regression models^25. Previously, nationwide
   studies evaluating these associations were not possible because
   nationwide estimates of contaminant concentrations were not available
   (distribution boundaries are not publicly available for the majority of
   CWSs). However, our team recently developed county-level,
   population-weighted estimates of contaminant concentrations in CWSs
   across the US for the 2000–2011 time period, which were developed from
   routine compliance monitoring records (EPA requires CWSs to routinely
   monitor for regulated contaminants, including arsenic and
   uranium)^16,17.

   In this study, we examined the county-level association between
   racial/ethnic composition (the proportion of residents belonging to a
   given racial/ethnic group) and CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations
   across the conterminous US using geospatial models. Our objectives were
   to (a) evaluate the county-level distribution and spatial
   autocorrelation of CWS arsenic and uranium, (b) assess the nationwide
   county-level association between racial/ethnic composition and CWS
   arsenic and uranium concentrations in geospatial models, and c)
   quantify the strength, direction, and spatial stationarity of these
   associations at the local level. We specifically assessed geometric
   mean ratios in CWS metal concentrations per 10% higher proportion of
   residents who were non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic White,
   Hispanic/Latino, and American Indian/Alaskan Native. We predicted that
   higher proportions of non-Hispanic White residents would be associated
   with lower CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations (likely reflecting
   white supremacy and structural racism related to public drinking water
   infrastructure, investment decisions, and regulatory action that
   specifically benefit non-Hispanic White communities, which have been
   previously documented for some water exposures)^23,24,26,27, and that
   higher proportions of Hispanic/Latino and American Indian residents
   would be associated with higher CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations
   (also consistent with previous documented inequalities in public
   drinking water infrastructure and regulatory action across population
   groups)^20,23,28,29. We also anticipated that the association between
   racial/ethnic composition and CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations
   would be unique for each racial/ethnic group and would differ in
   magnitude and direction of the association across different regions of
   the US because of regional differences in racial/ethnic composition,
   geologic context, urban vs rural landscapes, and land-use patterns
   relevant for drinking water arsenic and uranium concentrations. As a
   secondary analysis, we also assessed the association between
   racial/ethnic composition and CWS selenium and barium because these
   metals/metalloids are also regulated in CWSs by the EPA, are frequently
   detected in CWSs, and previous studies found significant inequalities
   in concentrations across sociodemographic and regional groups in
   CWS-level analyses^16 (although the health impacts of chronic,
   low-level exposure to selenium and barium are less clear^5,30,31).

   In this work, we show that higher proportions of Hispanic/Latino and
   American Indian/Alaskan Native residents are associated with
   significantly higher CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations at the
   county-level, while higher proportions of non-Hispanic White residents
   are associated with lower CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations. The
   association between racial/ethnic composition and CWS arsenic and
   uranium concentrations differs in magnitude and direction across
   regions; higher proportions of non-Hispanic Black residents is
   associated with higher CWS arsenic and uranium in regions where
   concentrations of these contaminants are high. Findings from this study
   can advance environmental justice initiatives by informing federal and
   state-level infrastructure investments, financial and technical support
   for CWSs, and additional regulatory action to protect communities
   disproportionately exposed to major public drinking water contaminants.

Results

Spatial distribution and clustering of arsenic and uranium in CWSs

   Our analysis uses previously developed, county-level,
   population-weighted concentration estimates of CWS arsenic (2006–2011,
   N = 2585 counties) and uranium (2000–2011, N = 1174 counties)^16,17.
   Maps showing the mean concentration estimates of county-level CWS
   arsenic and uranium across the conterminous US are presented in Fig. 1.
   Both county-level CWS arsenic and uranium exhibited significant
   positive global spatial autocorrelation (Moran’s I = 0.62, p
   value < 0.001 for arsenic, and I = 0.68, p value < 0.001 for uranium).
   We next identified specific areas of the US where spatial
   autocorrelation was present by assessing Local Indicators of Spatial
   Association (LISA) clusters. We observed significant High-High and
   Low-Low LISA clusters for both arsenic and uranium, which are presented
   in Fig. 1. Areas with High-High significant spatial autocorrelation for
   both arsenic and uranium were located in the Midwest and Southwest
   (e.g. Nevada, California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Kansas, Nebraska)
   where CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations are highest in underlying
   groundwater^16,17,32. Low-Low clusters for arsenic were identified in
   the Southeast and Mid-Atlantic regions (e.g. Alabama, Arkansas, North
   and South Carolina, Virginia, Kentucky). Low-Low clusters for uranium
   were located in similar geographic areas, although spatial coverage was
   poorer in the eastern US. We also identified significant positive
   spatial autocorrelation for barium and selenium (Supplementary Fig. 1).
   Fig. 1: Nationwide spatial distribution of county-level community water
   system (CWS) metal concentrations and local indicators of spatial
   associations (LISA) clusters.
   figure 1

   a Arsenic. b Uranium. County-level CWS metal concentrations were
   originally developed and described by Nigra et al. (2020) and Ravalli
   et al. (2022) and are categorized and colored in red scale. The highest
   concentration categories correspond to the current MCL (10 μ/L for
   arsenic and 30 μ/L for uranium). High-High LISA clusters are shown in
   red, and Low-Low LISA clusters are shown in blue. Counties overlaid
   with gray hatch marks are missing CWS metal concentration estimates.
   All counties included in the analyses had at least 1 neighbor county.
   Full size image

County-level sociodemographic characteristics and metal concentrations

   Because we restricted our analysis of each racial/ethnic group to
   counties with at least 100 residents of that group to avoid positivity
   violations^33 (i.e., the number of residents in a given racial/ethnic
   subgroup should be greater than zero for all counties analyzed or
   effect estimates would be extrapolated beyond the range of actual
   values), the number of counties included in the analysis of each
   racial/ethnic group differed (see Methods setion: Exclusion criteria).
   Across the counties included in each racial/ethnic analysis and all
   counties included in any analysis (N = 2653), we first described mean
   county-level CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations, racial/ethnic
   composition, and other county-level characteristics of interest
   (Table 1). Nationwide, the county-level mean percentage of residents
   belonging to each racial/ethnic group was 7% (non-Hispanic Black), 2%
   (American Indian/Alaskan Native), 9% (Hispanic/Latino), and 80%
   (non-Hispanic White). In analyses for each racial/ethnic group, we
   evaluated a total of 1881 (non-Hispanic Black), 1575 (American
   Indian/Alaskan Native), 2401 (Hispanic/Latino), and 2653 (non-Hispanic
   White) counties. Compared to counties included in any analysis,
   counties included in the analysis for non-Hispanic Black residents had
   lower mean CWS arsenic (1.17 μg/L vs. 1.42 μg/L) and uranium (2.5 μg/L
   vs. 3.45 μg/L) concentrations, a lower percentage of CWSs reliant on
   groundwater, and a lower percentage of the population living in rural
   areas. Counties included in the analysis for American Indian/Alaskan
   Native residents had larger population size and density and the lowest
   percentage of the population living in rural areas. Counties included
   in the analysis for Hispanic/Latino residents had higher mean CWS
   uranium (3.38 μg/L vs. 3.45 μg/L) concentrations. No counties were
   excluded for having <100 residents in the analysis for non-Hispanic
   White residents, and therefore these counties are the same as all
   counties included in any analysis.
   Table 1 County-level mean estimated community water system (CWS) metal
   concentrations and sociodemographic characteristics for all counties
   included in any analysis (N = 2631 counties), and separately for
   counties included in analyses specific to each racial/ethnic group
   (counties with >100 residents of each racial/ethnic group)
   Full size table

Spatial lag regression

   To identify nationwide inequalities in CWS arsenic and uranium by
   racial/ethnic composition, we quantified the association between
   county-level racial/ethnic composition and CWS arsenic and uranium
   separately for each of the four racial/ethnic groups using spatial lag
   regression models with an autoregressive correlation structure to
   account for spatial dependence (see Methods section: Statistical
   analysis: spatial lag regression)^34. We evaluated the geometric mean
   ratios (GMRs) and corresponding percent differences in CWS arsenic and
   uranium concentrations per a 10 percent higher proportion of residents
   belonging to each racial/ethnic group in progressively adjusted models
   (Table 2).
   Table 2 Geometric mean ratios (95% CI) of county-level community water
   system (CWS) arsenic and uranium concentrations per a 10 percent higher
   proportion of non-Hispanic Black, American Indian/Alaskan Native,
   Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White residents, from spatial lag
   regression models
   Full size table

   Our main model of interest (Model 1) adjusted for population density,
   the percent of public drinking water sourced from groundwater supplies,
   median household income, and the percent of adults with a high school
   diploma. Effect estimates were considered statistically significant
   when 95% confidence intervals did not cross the null (GMR of 1 and
   percent change of 0). In fully adjusted models (Model 1), the percent
   increase in the geometric mean (95% CI) of CWS metal concentrations per
   10% higher proportion of Hispanic/Latino residents was 6% (4, 8) for
   arsenic and 17% (13, 22) for uranium. For a 10% higher proportion of
   American Indian/Alaskan Native residents, the percent increase in the
   geometric mean (95% CI) of CWS metal concentration was 7% (3, 11) for
   arsenic and 2% (−4, 8) for uranium. For a 10% higher proportion of
   non-Hispanic Black residents, the percent decrease in the geometric
   mean (95% CI) of CWS metal concentration was 8% (10, 6) for arsenic and
   9% (13, 5) for uranium. The percent decrease in the geometric mean (95%
   CI) of CWS metal concentrations for a 10% higher proportion of
   non-Hispanic White residents was 1% (2, 0) for arsenic and 5% (8, 3)
   for uranium. Models further adjusting for the composition of other
   racial/ethnic groups yielded similar results (Model 2).

   We performed several sensitivity analyses, all with similar findings.
   Adjusting for the CDC/ATSDR’s county-level index of socioeconomic
   status^35 (rather than median household income and the percent of
   adults with a high school education) yielded similar findings,
   supporting that the adjustment for income and education in Model 1
   (derived from our conceptual framework in Supplementary Fig. 1) was
   able to capture socioeconomic status. We conducted several additional
   sensitivity analyses that also yielded robust findings, including:
   further adjustment for the total number of non-Hispanic White
   residents, using county-level 95th percentile CWS arsenic and uranium
   concentrations (rather than the mean), assessing higher proportions of
   residents in a given racial/ethnic group corresponding to the
   interquartile range and 60% (rather than 10%), without adjustment for
   population density, and after restriction to counties in the western US
   where CWS arsenic and uranium are highest (see Methods: Statistical
   analysis: spatial lag regression and Supplementary Table 1). As a
   complementary analysis to our assessment of higher proportions of
   non-Hispanic White residents, we also assessed the association per a
   10% higher proportion of all residents who were not categorized as
   non-Hispanic White, including non-Hispanic Black, American
   Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic/Latino, non-Hispanic Asian, Native
   Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and all residents in other
   racial/ethnic categories. For a 10% higher proportion of these
   residents (all residents who were not categorized as non-Hispanic
   White), the percent increase in the geometric mean (95% CI) was 1% (−1,
   3) for arsenic and 10% (6, 14) for uranium (results are shown in
   Supplementary Table 2). Because this association persisted even after
   combining all residents not categorized as non-Hispanic White, these
   complementary findings support the general hypothesis and leading
   theoretical framework on water exposure disparities- that white
   supremacy and structural racism are associated with drinking water
   inequalities^23. However, the specific mechanisms underlying these
   disparities (e.g., infrastructure investments or management decisions
   specifically benefiting non-Hispanic White communities, etc.) are
   beyond the scope of this analysis. Findings were also similar for
   barium and selenium (Supplementary Table 3).

Geographically weighted regression

   To assess local inequalities in CWS arsenic and uranium by
   racial/ethnic composition we next explored the strength and direction
   of the association between racial/ethnic composition and CWS arsenic
   and uranium, and evaluated spatial non-stationarity in the effect
   estimates via geographically weighted regression models (see Methods
   section: Statistical analysis: Geographically weighted regression).
   County-specific coefficients from the geographically weighted
   regression analysis for each racial/ethnic group and CWS arsenic and
   uranium are displayed in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. County colors
   represent the magnitude of the local GMR of CWS metals for a 10% higher
   proportion of residents in each specified racial/ethnic group, with
   positive associations (GMR > 1) displayed in red and inverse (GMR < 1)
   associations displayed in blue. Positive associations imply that the
   CWS metal concentrations are higher in the county than predicted from
   the regression model, potentially due to local-scale heterogeneity.
   Fig. 2: Direction and magnitude of the geometric mean ratio (GMR) of
   county-level community water system (CWS) arsenic concentrations per 10
   percent higher county proportion of non-Hispanic Black, American
   Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White
   residents from geographically weighted regression models.
   figure 2

   Models were adjusted for population density, the percent of public
   drinking water supplied from groundwater sources, median household
   income, and the percent of residents with a high school diploma.
   Counties with a positive effect estimate (GMR > 1) are shown in red
   scale colors, counties with a negative effect estimate (GMR < 1) are
   shown in blue scale colors, and counties where a null effect estimate
   was observed are shown in white. Counties with missing data are shown
   with light gray hatch marks. The number of counties included in the
   geographically weighted regression analysis for each racial/ethnic
   group were: non-Hispanic Black (n = 1848), American Indian/Alaskan
   Native (n = 1522), Hispanic/Latino (n = 2341), and non-Hispanic White
   (n = 2585). Photocopy-friendly versions of these maps (contrasts
   visible in black and white) are available in Supplementary Fig. 8.
   Full size image
   Fig. 3: Direction and magnitude of the geometric mean ratio (GMR) of
   county-level community water system (CWS) uranium concentrations per 10
   percent higher county proportion of non-Hispanic Black, American
   Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White
   residents from geographically weighted regression models.
   figure 3

   Models were adjusted for population density, the percent of public
   drinking water supplied from groundwater sources, median household
   income, and the percent of residents with a high school diploma.
   Counties with a positive effect estimate (GMR > 1) are shown in red
   scale colors, counties with a negative effect estimate (GMR < 1) are
   shown in blue scale colors, and counties where a null effect estimate
   was observed are shown in white. Counties with missing data are shown
   with light gray hatch marks. The number of counties included in the
   geographically weighted regression analysis for each racial/ethnic
   group were: non-Hispanic Black (n = 832), American Indian/Alaskan
   Native (n = 778), Hispanic/Latino (n = 1170), and non-Hispanic White
   (n = 1174). Photocopy-friendly versions of these maps (contrasts
   visible in black and white) are available in Supplementary Fig. 8.
   Full size image

   We observed spatial non-stationarity in the associations between
   racial/ethnic composition and CWS metal concentrations for all
   racial/ethnic groups for both arsenic and uranium, with different
   associations at the local level for each racial/ethnic group. Although
   the GMRs of CWS metal concentrations per a 10 percent higher proportion
   of non-Hispanic Black residents were inverse in nationwide spatial lag
   regression models (Table 2), geographically weighted regression
   indicated a positive association for CWS arsenic and uranium in areas
   where these CWS concentrations are high (particularly in the southwest,
   see Fig. 1). This was particularly evident for arsenic in western
   Texas, Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah, Oregon, and Washington, and
   for uranium in Arizona, California, Nevada, Oregon, and Oklahoma where
   we observed positive associations of higher magnitude (Figs. 2 and 3).
   Similarly, we observed a positive association between higher
   proportions of American Indian/Alaskan Native residents and CWS arsenic
   and uranium in the Northern Plains and in the west, particularly across
   Oregon, Washington, Montana, North Dakota and South Dakota, Minnesota,
   and Wisconsin for arsenic, and California, Nevada, Oregon, North
   Dakota, and Wisconsin for uranium. Findings for Hispanic/Latino
   residents were more consistent with findings from global spatial lag
   models, with significant, positive associations between higher
   proportions of Hispanic/Latino residents and CWS arsenic and uranium
   across most of the conterminous US. As anticipated, we observed higher
   model goodness-of-fit in areas with higher CWS metal concentrations and
   better spatial coverage of CWS arsenic and uranium estimates
   (Supplementary Figs. 3 and 4). Associations and goodness-of-fit for
   selenium and barium also differed locally and are presented in
   Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6.

Discussion

   Our study provides new evidence that racial/ethnic composition is
   associated with public drinking water arsenic and uranium
   concentrations, adding to a growing body of literature characterizing
   nationwide environmental and racial injustices in US public drinking
   water contaminants^16,17,18,19,20,26,27,28,29. Although our analysis
   was informed by a strong conceptual framework (see Supplementary
   Fig. 1) and other previously well-developed frameworks describing how
   disparities in drinking water exposures result from structural and
   environmental racism^20,21,22,23,24, our study is descriptive in nature
   and is not intended to identify mechanisms by which racial/ethnic
   public water concentration disparities were created or reinforced.

   As predicted, nationwide analyses indicated that a higher proportion of
   non-Hispanic White residents was associated with lower CWS arsenic and
   uranium, while a higher proportion of Hispanic/Latino and American
   Indian/Alaskan Native residents was associated with higher CWS arsenic
   and uranium. These findings remained robust across several sensitivity
   analyses considering alternative adjustment approaches and alternative
   magnitudes of change in racial/ethnic composition, and are also
   consistent with previous studies utilizing non-geospatial approaches at
   the water system level^20,26,29. These findings likely reflect
   structural environmental racism and white supremacy and privilege.

   Structural racism refers to the “totality of ways in which societies
   foster racial discrimination, through mutually reinforcing inequitable
   systems (in housing, education, employment, earnings, benefits, credit,
   media, health care, criminal justice, and so on)”^36,37. Structural
   racism serves to maintain white supremacy, in part, by amassing
   resources for and benefiting white communities to the detriment of
   communities of color^38,39,40. Extensive research in the fields of
   sociology and epidemiology support that racism is a fundamental cause
   of disease and producer of health inequalities across racial/ethnic
   groups^41,42,43. Structural racism produces health inequalities for
   marginalized communities through numerous mechanisms, including through
   the creation and perpetuation of inequalities in toxic environmental
   exposures, social determinants of health, and other psychosocial
   stressors^36,37,39,44,45,46. Prior studies identifying the specific
   mechanisms underlying water inequalities are abundant, although
   responsible mechanisms differ across contaminants, geographic regions,
   and the sociodemographic characteristics of impacted communities.
   Briefly, previous studies have identified community linguistic
   isolation, selective enforcement of drinking water regulations, the
   underbounding of communities of color from municipal boundaries and
   water services, and the direct withholding of resources and
   infrastructure investments as examples of mechanisms responsible for
   producing and maintaining inequalities in exposure to regulated
   drinking water contaminants^23,26,47,48,49. For example, inequalities
   in public water lead exposure are related to changes in water supply
   sources, corrosion control, service line infrastructure investments,
   and targeted tap sampling for compliance monitoring^32,50,51,52,53.
   Similar mechanisms may underlie the unequal distribution of arsenic and
   uranium concentrations in CWS observed in this study, although
   additional research is needed to evaluate those mechanisms in detail.

   Consistent with our other prediction that these associations would
   differ across geographic regions due to underlying geologic context,
   (i.e., water metal concentrations are influenced by natural composition
   of rocks and soil, and anthropogenic contamination from industrial
   activity, mining, agriculture)^2,3,5 we found larger effect estimates
   from geographically weighted regression models in the southwestern US
   where water arsenic and uranium are high, and smaller effect estimates
   in other regions where these concentrations of these contaminants are
   low (i.e., the southeast). Taken together, these findings also suggest
   that communities with higher proportions of Hispanic/Latino and
   American Indian/Alaskan Native residents may be served by public water
   systems with elevated concentrations of other contaminants that were
   not evaluated in the present study, especially for contaminants that
   are present at meaningful concentrations in the geographic area.

   There are several potential explanations for the observed inverse
   relationship between the proportion of non-Hispanic Black residents and
   CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations in nationwide analyses. First,
   nationwide, non-Hispanic Black residents are more likely to live in
   urban areas^54,55, and therefore may be more likely served by large
   urban CWSs which have higher economies of scale and can implement more
   health protective water treatment systems and decisions. Cities with
   higher proportions of non-Hispanic Black residents are also more likely
   located in the eastern and southeastern US, where CWS arsenic
   concentrations are low. Although the majority of Hispanic/Latino
   residents also live in urban areas, these residents are also more
   likely to live in the southwestern US where groundwater arsenic and
   uranium concentrations are naturally high^19,56,57. This explanation is
   supported by our findings from geographically weighted regression
   (Figs. 2 and 3) and the analyses restricted to western counties
   (Supplementary Table 1), which indicated that a higher proportion of
   non-Hispanic Black residents was associated with higher CWS arsenic and
   uranium in the southwest, but not in the southeast where arsenic and
   uranium water concentrations are low (Fig. 1). These findings suggest
   that racial/ethnic inequalities in public water contaminant exposures
   may be more likely or more severe in geographic regions with both a
   high percentage of public water users of the specified racial/ethnic
   group and relatively high concentrations of specific contaminants in
   source water. Additional public water contaminants beyond metals should
   be also assessed, as these will likely display different nationwide
   geographic patterns which may overlap with areas where a majority of
   residents are non-Hispanic Black^23,24. Future studies should assess
   these differences in analyses stratified by urban/rural areas to
   evaluate these potential explanations. Additionally, in areas of the US
   where non-Hispanic Black and American Indian communities rely heavily
   on private wells (the rural southeast and the rural Great Plains and
   southwest, respectively), public water systems may predominantly serve
   non-Hispanic White residents. Therefore, it is possible that the
   current analysis may underestimate the impact of community
   racial/ethnic composition on public water arsenic and uranium for both
   non-Hispanic Black and American Indian communities in these particular
   areas.

   Across all analyses, our findings were largely consistent for arsenic
   and uranium, likely reflecting the clustering and co-occurrence of
   arsenic and uranium in public water systems which has been previously
   described in detail^16. The co-occurrence of arsenic and uranium has
   been documented in both regulated and unregulated water
   supplies^16,19,32,58,59, and may be related to carbonate complexes
   increasing the solubility of arsenic and uranium, and/or the presence
   of bicarbonate ions in oxic water sources (bicarbonate ions may be
   especially relevant for the continued co-occurrence of arsenic and
   uranium in treated water)^60,61,62.

   Our findings are particularly relevant to public health because there
   is no safe level of exposure to inorganic arsenic and uranium^2,3. At
   moderate to high levels of exposure, inorganic arsenic is associated
   with a number of adverse health outcomes including diabetes, lung
   disease, neurologic effects, kidney disease, and birth outcomes
   including low birth weight and impaired neurodevelopment; inorganic
   arsenic is also associated with cardiovascular disease and increased
   oxidative stress even at low to moderate exposure levels common in the
   US population^1,5,63,64,65,66. Uranium exposure is associated with
   kidney disease, including kidney cancer, and neurologic and
   cardiovascular disease, although evidence for other adverse health
   outcomes is more limited^2,6,9,10,67. Although the effect estimates
   described in the current study are small to modest, their public health
   implications may be substantial when considered across the entire
   population. Several studies have identified disparities in health
   outcomes across racial/ethnic groups that are related to uranium and
   arsenic exposure. For example, American Indian/Alaskan Native
   populations experience substantially higher rates of kidney cancer
   compared to non-Hispanic White populations, especially in the
   Southwestern US where uranium exposures and co-exposures to arsenic and
   other metal mixtures are relatively high as a result of the uranium
   mining activity that occurred over the past century^19,58,59,68. For
   example, the mean uranium concentration in urine (biomarker of internal
   dose) among pregnant women living in the American Indian Reservations
   in the Southwest is 2.67–2.8 times higher compared to the general US
   population^69.

   Our study has several limitations. First, our nationwide evaluation of
   the county-level association between racial/ethnic composition and CWS
   metal concentrations may mask associations operating at finer
   geographic resolutions (e.g. within states, or across Census blocks or
   zip-codes)^21,70. We were not able to evaluate these associations at
   finer geographic resolutions because nationwide CWS concentration
   estimates are not yet available at these levels of aggregation (there
   is currently no publicly available, nationwide map of public drinking
   water system distribution boundaries that can be used to generate
   concentration estimates at these resolutions). Future studies at
   smaller spatial scales and with finer geographic resolution may also
   address the substantial differences in county size across the US.
   Larger county sizes may lead to larger measurement error, which may
   especially impact findings in the western US compared to the eastern US
   where counties areas are smaller. One recent study at the Census-block
   level in California also found significant associations between higher
   proportions of residents of color and drinking water arsenic
   concentrations, suggesting that these associations are likely also
   present for other states in the southwestern US^71. Although some
   studies have evaluated sociodemographic characteristics of the
   “city-served” by CWSs, which is reported in the US EPA’s Safe Drinking
   Water Information System (SDWIS), approximately half of all public
   water systems did not report “city-served” in SDWIS^24,72. In future
   studies, available water system distribution maps can be used to
   determine if “city-served” as reported in SDWIS provides a reasonable
   approximation of water system distribution boundaries nationwide.

   Second, although our nationwide, county-level analysis was intended to
   minimize selection bias, we restricted our analyses to counties with at
   least 100 residents in the racial/ethnic group of interest to avoid
   positivity violations, and this may have introduced selection bias.
   Counties excluded from analysis under this criterion had smaller
   population sizes, lower population densities, a higher percentage of
   residents living in rural areas, higher proportions of non-Hispanic
   White residents, and higher CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations
   (Supplementary Table 4). We did not assess associations for Asian and
   Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander groups because no counties had >60%
   of residents for these groups. Future analyses can assess these
   associations at finer geographic resolutions, restricted to areas with
   larger populations of interest. We relied on Census bridged race
   categorized data, which does not capture several domains of
   racial/ethnic composition and could lead to misclassification. In
   addition, our analyses for uranium were limited by the relatively poor
   spatial coverage in CWS uranium concentration estimates, especially for
   the eastern and southeastern US. The CWS uranium concentrations used
   here are based on the most recently available CWS uranium monitoring
   records made publicly available by EPA, and are to our knowledge the
   most complete estimates currently available. Future studies can improve
   upon these estimates when EPA releases additional compliance monitoring
   records for the Fourth Six Year Review (expected 2023).

   Future studies should also evaluate the association between
   racial/ethnic segregation and inequalities in CWS metal concentration
   estimates, especially because prior analyses of noise exposure^70 and
   air pollution^21,73,74 indicate that racial/ethnic segregation is
   associated with exposure inequalities. Geographically weighted
   regression indicated a positive association between larger proportions
   of non-Hispanic Black residents and CWS arsenic in parts of west Texas
   and the Midwest. These findings suggest that additional analyses at a
   finer geographic resolution should focus specifically on these
   particularly vulnerable geographic areas where metals in CWSs and soil
   are particularly high (public water system distribution boundaries are
   also publicly available for many of these states). Future analyses
   should also assess whether changes in racial/ethnic composition and
   migration patterns over time are associated with changes in CWS arsenic
   and uranium concentrations over time.

   Current US public drinking water infrastructure, management, and
   regulatory action does not adequately protect communities of color from
   elevated contaminant exposures. Recent federal infrastructure
   investment proposals have suggested targeting financial and technical
   support to small public water systems in rural and tribal areas, which
   experience substantial difficulties in achieving lower contaminant
   concentrations^75. Findings from our current study add to a mounting
   body of evidence supporting that financial and technical support,
   infrastructure investments, and regulatory action must be directed
   towards supporting communities with larger populations of American
   Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic Black
   residents. Given the known inequalities in public drinking water lead
   exposure for non-Hispanic Black communities across the US, specific and
   additional financial and technical support should also be directed to
   public water systems serving these communities to reduce elevated water
   concentrations and associated health outcomes. Racial/ethnic
   inequalities in public drinking water arsenic and uranium
   concentrations are unacceptable, and further research is needed to
   identify the specific mechanisms by which structural racism is
   operating to result in concentration inequalities for multiple
   regulated drinking water contaminants.

Methods

County-level public drinking water metal concentrations

   We utilized previously developed, county-level, population-weighted
   concentration estimates of arsenic, uranium, selenium, and barium
   concentrations in CWSs across the US, which were previously developed
   and described in detail^17. These concentration estimates are based on
   the most recent publicly available nationwide monitoring data for
   public water systems. Briefly, county-level CWS metal concentration
   estimates were developed using routine compliance monitoring records
   compiled by the US Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) for the
   National Contaminant Occurrence Database supporting the Second and
   Third Six Year Review (SYR)^76. The SYR database contains routine
   compliance monitoring records voluntarily submitted to EPA by primacy
   agencies including states and tribal authorities^77,78. CWS metal
   concentrations were averaged within a six-year period (2006–2011) for
   arsenic, selenium, and barium and within an eleven-year period
   (2000–2011) for uranium. These three- and eleven-year averages yield
   unbiased concentration estimates by accounting for the different
   compliance monitoring periods defined by EPA’s Standardized Monitoring
   Framework requirements for arsenic (regulated under the Chemical
   Contaminants Rule and the Final Arsenic Rule) and for uranium
   (regulated under the Radionuclides Rule)^17. Average metal
   concentrations at the county-level were calculated by weighing the
   average concentration for each CWS within the county by the size of the
   population served by each CWS. County-level CWS metal averages are
   missing when a) no compliance monitoring records were submitted for
   that county to the SYR, or b) CWSs serving that county reported serving
   <50% of the public-water reliant population in the entire county^17.
   All county-level CWS metal variables were right skewed and natural
   log-transformed for analysis.

County-level racial/ethnic composition and sociodemographic data

   County-level racial/ethnic composition variables were derived from 2010
   US Census Population Estimates and included the proportion of residents
   who are American Indian or Alaskan Native (hereafter referred to as
   American Indian/Alaskan Native), non-Hispanic Asian, Native Hawaiian or
   Other Pacific Islander, Hispanic or Latino (hereafter referred to as
   Hispanic/Latino), non-Hispanic Black or African American (hereafter
   referred to as non-Hispanic Black), and non-Hispanic White. We selected
   sociodemographic variables from time periods that overlapped with the
   time period of the CWS arsenic and uranium concentration estimates
   (2006–2011). The percent of adults with a high school diploma was
   derived from the 2007–2011 US Census American Community Survey. Median
   household income was derived from the 2011 Small Area Income and
   Poverty Estimates and 2010–2011 National Center for Education
   Statistics data. We also downloaded the CDC/ATSDR’s 2014 county-level
   index for socioeconomic status, which we adjusted for in sensitivity
   analyses rather than adjusting for median household income and the
   percent of adults with a high school diploma (the CDC’s county-level
   index for socioeconomic status is a rank-order index for all counties
   in the US based on the percent of adults living below the federal
   poverty line, the percent of unemployed adults, median household
   income, and the percent of adults without a high school diploma)^35.
   Although other variables which reflect socioeconomic status were
   available and are likely related to both racial/ethnic composition and
   CWS metal concentrations (such as the percent of the population living
   in rural areas, the percent of residents without health insurance,
   percent unemployment, percent of children eligible for free lunch, and
   percent of children living below poverty level), these variables did
   not open biasing paths on our conceptual diagram (Supplementary
   Fig. 1), and we therefore did not adjust for them. County total
   population and population density (population per square mile) were
   also retrieved from the 2010 US Census. We estimated the percent of
   public drinking water supplied by groundwater sources (versus surface
   water sources) from estimates of total groundwater and surface water
   withdrawn for public drinking water calculated by the US Geological
   Survey for 2010 (we used 2015 estimates for 20 counties which were
   missing estimates in 2010; the Spearman correlation coefficient between
   estimates for the two years was 0.93)^56,57. A full description of all
   county-level variables used in this analysis is available in
   Supplementary Table 5. All data management and analysis were conducted
   in R version 4.0.3, except the assessment of spatial autocorrelation
   which was conducted in GeoDa version 1.18.0. For visualization, maps
   were generated in QGIS version 3.10.

Exclusion criteria

   We restricted our analysis to conterminous US counties/county
   equivalents (N = 3158) because counties in Alaska and Hawaii have few
   neighboring counties and unique geological contexts impacting water
   contaminant concentrations. We further excluded 473 counties that did
   not have CWS concentration estimates available for either arsenic or
   uranium, 34 counties missing the percent of public drinking water
   supplied by groundwater sources, and 20 counties missing the percent of
   adults with a high school diploma. The county level CWS metal
   concentration estimates and sociodemographic characteristics for
   counties excluded from our analyses are presented in (Supplementary
   Table 4). After these exclusions, the total number of counties with CWS
   metal concentration estimates available was N = 2585 for arsenic and
   N = 1174 for uranium. No counties were missing racial/ethnic
   composition variables. We further restricted our analysis to assessing
   the association between county-level racial/ethnic composition and
   public drinking water metal concentrations for the proportion of
   non-Hispanic Black, American Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic/Latino,
   and non-Hispanic White residents. Analyses were conducted separately
   for each of the five racial/ethnic groups. We further restricted our
   analyses to counties with at least 100 residents in the racial/ethnic
   group of interest because very small population numbers could violate
   positivity assumptions (i.e., for some counties, the proportion of
   residents of a given racial/ethnic group would be zero or very near
   zero, and therefore effect estimates would be extrapolated beyond the
   range of actual values), or bias results if small increases in the
   absolute number of residents resulted in large percentage
   differences^33. We selected 100 as the cut-point assuming most public
   water systems serve at least 25 households with an average of four
   residents per household (EPA defines public water systems as those that
   serve at least 15 service connections or 25 people at least 60 days per
   year)^79. We did not evaluate associations for the proportion of
   non-Hispanic Asian and Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
   residents because no conterminous US counties had >60% of residents in
   these categories, a common cut-point to identify racial/ethnic majority
   areas in prior literature^80.

Statistical analysis: descriptive data analysis

   To describe sociodemographic differences and differences in public
   drinking water metal concentrations across all counties in our analysis
   versus the counties included in the analysis for each racial/ethnic
   group, we described mean county-level CWS arsenic and uranium,
   concentrations, population size, population density, the percent of
   public drinking water supplied from groundwater sources, median
   household income, the percent of residents with a high school diploma,
   the percent of the population living in rural areas, and racial/ethnic
   composition across these county categories and presented them in
   Table 1. We also compared these characteristics across counties that
   were excluded from analysis to assess potential selection bias
   (Supplementary Table 4).

Statistical analysis: assessing spatial clustering

   We first explored spatial autocorrelation (spatial dependence) in
   county-level CWS metal concentration estimates across the US. We used a
   simple contiguity first order queen weighting matrix with binary values
   identifying neighbors (i = 1) and non-neighbors (i = 0). Counties with
   no neighbors were excluded. We evaluated the county-level association
   between the five racial/ethnic composition variables and CWS mean
   arsenic and uranium concentrations in 8 separate ordinary least squares
   (OLS) linear models, regressing each CWS metal on each of the four
   racial/ethnic composition variables (proportion of non-Hispanic Black,
   American Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White
   residents). To assess global spatial autocorrelation, we visually
   assessed the residuals from each OLS model and assessed Moran’s I
   residual scatterplots and statistics for each CWS metal. The Moran’s I
   statistic is the coefficient of best fit associated with the OLS line
   of best fit for each local unit’s (i) standardized value plotted
   against the local unit’s identified neighborhood (j) standardized
   average value of CWS metal concentration. To assess local spatial
   autocorrelation, we examined Local Indicators of Spatial Association
   (LISA) statistics, where every local unit’s (I[i]) LISA score is the
   product of the standardized units’ value (z[i]) relative to the average
   standard local values, multiplied by the sum of the weight matrix value
   times the neighborhood average value^80.

Statistical analysis: spatial lag regression

   Because OLS residuals, Moran’s I scatterplots, and Moran’s I statistics
   (p < 0.001) all indicated global spatial autocorrelation for arsenic
   and uranium, and ignoring spatial autocorrelation violates assumptions
   of independence and can bias effect estimates^34, we further assessed
   whether a spatial error or spatial lag model was most appropriate for
   our data using the Lagrange (Lag) Multiplier diagnostics function
   (lm.LMtest) in R using the package “spatialreg”. A significant spatial
   lag or error term indicate that the residuals across spatial locations
   are correlated. Both the spatial lag and spatial error models returned
   p-values < 0.001, but we concluded that the spatial lag model was
   preferable to the spatial error model because the model estimates were
   larger^81. A description of these diagnostic assessments for the OLS
   and spatial lag regression models are available in Supplementary
   Table 6.

   To quantify the association between county-level racial/ethnic
   composition and CWS metal concentrations, we evaluated spatial lag
   regression models with an autoregressive correlation structure
   separately for CWS arsenic and uranium concentrations and for each of
   the five racial/ethnic composition variables in R using the lagsarlm
   function from the “spatialreg” package^82. We assessed the geometric
   mean ratio (GMR) and corresponding percent difference of CWS arsenic
   and uranium concentrations per 10% higher proportion of residents
   classified as non-Hispanic Black, American Indian/Alaskan Native,
   Hispanic/Latino, and non-Hispanic White. Fully adjusted models (Model
   1) were adjusted for population density, the percent of public drinking
   water sourced from groundwater supplies, median household income, the
   percent of adults with a high school diploma. Model 2 further adjusted
   for the proportion of the other racial/ethnic groups except for the
   proportion of non-Hispanic White residents. This “leave-one-out”
   modeling approach is useful when proportional variables sum to nearly
   100% and higher proportions of one component occur simultaneously with
   lower proportions of at least one other component (this approach has
   been used in studies assessing arsenic metabolism, cell type ratios,
   and nutritional epidemiology)^83. An example of the interpretation of
   the coefficient of interest from these models is as follows: in models
   assessing the proportion of Hispanic/Latino residents as the primary
   exposure, the coefficient for the proportion of Hispanic/Latino
   residents estimates the geometric mean ratio of CWS metal
   concentrations per 10% higher proportion of Hispanic/Latino residents
   because the proportion of non-Hispanic White residents is lower,
   controlling for the proportion of non-Hispanic Black and American
   Indian/Alaskan Native residents. We selected non-Hispanic White as the
   “leave-one-out” group because structural racism privileges and benefits
   this population group and we predicted that counties with lower
   proportions of these residents would have higher CWS metal
   concentrations. Because effect estimates from Model 1 and Model 2 were
   very similar, we selected the more parsimonious Model 1 as the main
   model of interest.

   We performed several sensitivity analyses. First, we repeated the
   analyses adjusting for Model 1 covariates and the total number of
   non-Hispanic White residents, with similar findings (results not
   shown). Second, we repeated the analyses using the county-level
   weighted 95^th percentile public drinking water metal concentrations
   (instead of the natural log-mean estimates), with similar findings
   although effect estimates were generally stronger (results not shown).
   Third, we repeated the analyses by assessing the geometric mean ratio
   of CWS arsenic and uranium per change in the proportion of a given
   racial/ethnic group that corresponds to (a) a 60% higher proportion of
   residents, a common cut-point to identify racial/ethnic majority areas
   in prior literature^80, and (b) the value corresponding to the
   interquartile range for the proportion of residents in the specified
   racial/ethnic group, with similar findings for both approaches
   (Supplementary Table 1). Fourth, we repeated the spatial lag regression
   evaluating the association for higher proportions of American
   Indian/Alaskan Native residents without adjusting for population
   density because many communities and counties with a large proportion
   of these residents have relatively low population density (effect
   estimates for both arsenic and uranium were similar but stronger,
   results not shown). Fifth, we repeated our analyses after restricting
   to counties in the western US where county-level CWS arsenic and
   uranium estimates are highest (we defined the western US as Washington,
   Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska,
   Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Arizona, Nevada,
   and California). Analyses restricted to western US generally yield
   similar findings although positive associations were identified for 10%
   higher proportions of non-Hispanic Black residents and uranium.
   However, these findings were limited by the small sample size (n = 296
   counties; Supplementary Table 1). Finally, to complement our analyses
   assessing higher proportions of non-Hispanic White residents, we
   assessed the associations per a 10% higher proportion of all residents
   who were not categorized as non-Hispanic White, including non-Hispanic
   Black, American Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic/Latino, non-Hispanic
   Asian, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and all residents in
   other racial/ethnic categories. This sensitivity analysis is
   specifically intended to evaluate the prediction that higher
   proportions of non-Hispanic White residents is associated with lower
   CWS metal concentrations.

Statistical analysis: geographically weighted regression

   To explore the strength and direction of the association between
   county-level racial/ethnic composition and CWS arsenic and uranium
   concentrations and evaluate spatial non-stationarity in the effect
   estimates, we conducted geographically weighted regression using the
   “GWmodel” package in R version 4.0.3^84. Geographically weighted
   regression models are exploratory, Gaussian-like, distance-based models
   that incorporate a spatial weighting function, combine geographic and
   attribute information, and obtain location-specific results. This
   approach provides a different regression output for each individual
   county, which allow us to assess variation across space in both (a) the
   magnitude and direction of the effect of racial/ethnic composition on
   CWS metal concentration, and (b) model goodness-of-fit. We ran separate
   geographically weighted regression models reproducing the separate
   models for CWS arsenic and uranium and for each of the four
   racial/ethnic groups that we previously assessed with global spatial
   lag regression models. Models were fully adjusted for population
   density, the percent of public drinking water sourced from groundwater
   supplies, median household income, and the percent of adults with a
   high school diploma (Model 1).

Reporting summary

   Further information on research design is available in the Nature
   Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Data availability

   All data used in this analysis are publicly available. The CWS metal
   concentration data are available at:
   https://github.com/annenigra/US-PublicWaterSystem-Metal-Estimates. An
   interactive map of county-level CWS metal concentrations is also
   available at: https://msph.shinyapps.io/drinking-water-dashboard/.
   County-level racial/ethnic composition and county-level
   sociodemographic data are available at:
   https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2011/compendia/usa-counties
   -2011.html and:
   https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/explore-health-rankings/rankings-d
   ata-documentation/national-data-documentation-2010-2018. The CDC Social
   Vulnerability Index data are available at:
   https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/placeandhealth/svi/data_documentation_downloa
   d.html. Data on the percent of public drinking water supplied by
   groundwater sources are available at:
   http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/cir1405. A full description of all
   county-level variables used in this analysis is available in
   Supplementary Table 5. Documentation of the data sources and processed
   data is available in the following GitHub repository:
   https://github.com/annenigra/race-ethnicity-water-metals.

Code availability

   Replication code and the full dataset required to reproduce the results
   are maintained in the following GitHub repository^85:
   https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7301984.

References

    1. Moon, K. A. et al. A dose-response meta-analysis of chronic arsenic
       exposure and incident cardiovascular disease. Int. J. Epidemiol.
       46, 1924–1939 (2017).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
    2. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR).
       Toxicological Profile For Uranium.
       https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxProfiles/ToxProfiles.aspx?id=440&tid=77
       (2013).
    3. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR).
       Toxicological Profile For Arsenic.
       https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxProfiles/ToxProfiles.aspx?id=22&tid=3
       (2007).
    4. Tellez-Plaza, M., Guallar, E. & Navas-Acien, A. Environmental
       metals and cardiovascular disease. BMJ. 362, k3435 (2018).
    5. Navas-Acien, A. & Tellez-Plaza, M. Metals and Health: Science and
       Practice. Maxcy-Rosenau-Last Public Health & Preventive Medicine
       (BMcGraw Hill, 2022).
    6. Wang, S. et al. A review of uranium-induced reproductive toxicity.
       Biol. Trace Elem. Res 196, 204–213 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  CAS  Google Scholar
    7. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). Substance
       Priority List. https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/spl/index.html (2020).
    8. Nigra, A. E., Moon, K. A., Jones, M. R., Sanchez, T. R. &
       Navas-Acien, A. Urinary arsenic and heart disease mortality in
       NHANES 2003–2014. Environ. Res. 200, 111387 (2021).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
    9. Ma, M., Wang, R., Xu, L., Xu, M. & Liu, S. Emerging health risks
       and underlying toxicological mechanisms of uranium contamination:
       Lessons from the past two decades. Environ. Int. 145, 106107
       (2020).
       Article  PubMed  CAS  Google Scholar
   10. Arzuaga, X., Rieth, S. H., Bathija, A. & Cooper, G. S. Renal
       effects of exposure to natural and depleted uranium: a review of
       the epidemiologic and experimental data. J. Toxicol. Environ. 13,
       527–545 (2010).
       CAS  Google Scholar
   11. United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). O. Report
       on the Environment (ROE). https://www.epa.gov/report-environment
       (2015).
   12. United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). O. National
       Primary Drinking Water Regulations.
       https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/national-primar
       y-drinking-water-regulations, (2015).
   13. New Jersey Section of the American Water Works Association. Safe
       Drinking Water Act Rules - https://www.njawwa.org/page/SDWA,
       (2017).
   14. Ahmad, A. et al. Arsenic reduction to <1 µg/L in Dutch drinking
       water. Environ. Int. 134, 105253 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  CAS  Google Scholar
   15. van der Wens, P. & Ahmad, A. Integrating Arsenic in Water Safety
       Planning in The Netherlands (CRC Press, The Netherlands, 2019).
   16. Ravalli, F. et al. Sociodemographic inequalities in uranium and
       other metals in community water systems across the US, 2006–2011.
       Lancet Planet. Health 6, E-320–E330 (2022).
       Article  Google Scholar
   17. Nigra, A. E. et al. Inequalities in public water arsenic
       concentrations in counties and community water systems across the
       United States, 2006–2011. Environ. Health Perspect. 128, 12 (2020).
       Article  Google Scholar
   18. Nigra, A. E. & Navas-Acien, A. Arsenic in US correctional facility
       drinking water, 2006–2011. Environ. Res. 188, 109768 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   19. Jones, L., Credo, J., Parnell, R. & Ingram, J. C. Dissolved uranium
       and arsenic in unregulated groundwater sources – western Navajo
       Nation. J. Contemp. Water Res. Educ. 169, 27–43 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   20. McDonald, Y. J. & Jones, N. E. Drinking water violations and
       environmental justice in the United States, 2011–2015. Am. J.
       Public Health 108, 1401–1407 (2018).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   21. Morello-Frosch, R. & Lopez, R. The riskscape and the color line:
       examining the role of segregation in environmental health
       disparities. Environ. Res. 102, 181–196 (2006).
       Article  PubMed  CAS  Google Scholar
   22. Switzer, D. & Teodoro, M. P. The color of drinking water: class,
       race, ethnicity, and safe drinking water act compliance. AWWA Water
       Sci. 109, 40–45 (2017).
       Google Scholar
   23. Balazs, C. L. & Ray, I. The drinking water disparities framework:
       on the origins and persistence of inequities in exposure. Am. J.
       Public Health 104, 603–611 (2014).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   24. VanDerslice, J. Drinking water infrastructure and environmental
       disparities: evidence and methodological considerations. Am. J.
       Public Health 101, S109–S114 (2011).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   25. Chaix, B., Merlo, J., Subramanian, S. V., Lynch, J. & Chauvin, P.
       Comparison of a spatial perspective with the multilevel analytical
       approach in neighborhood studies: the case of mental and behavioral
       disorders due to psychoactive substance use in Malmo, Sweden, 2001.
       Am. J. Epidemiol. 162, 171–182 (2005).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   26. Cory, D. C. & Rahman, T. Environmental justice and enforcement of
       the safe drinking water act: The Arizona arsenic experience. Ecol.
       Econ. 68, 1825–1837 (2009).
       Article  Google Scholar
   27. Wilson, S. M., Heaney, C. D., Cooper, J. & Wilson, O. Built
       environment issues in unserved and underserved African-American
       neighborhoods in North Carolina. Environ. Justice 1, 63–72 (2008).
       Article  Google Scholar
   28. Tariqi, A. Q. & Naughton, C. C. Water, health, and environmental
       justice in california: geospatial analysis of nitrate contamination
       and thyroid cancer. Environ. Eng. Sci. 38, 377–388 (2021).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   29. Balazs, C. L., Morello-Frosch, R., Hubbard, A. E. & Ray, I.
       Environmental justice implications of arsenic contamination in
       California’s San Joaquin Valley: a cross-sectional, cluster-design
       examining exposure and compliance in community drinking water
       systems. Environ. Health 11, 84 (2012).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   30. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR).
       Toxicological Profile: Barium.
       https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=327&tid=57, (2020).
   31. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR).
       Toxicological Profile: Selenium.
       https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxProfiles/ToxProfiles.aspx?id=153&tid=28
       ., (2014).
   32. Credo, J., Torkelson, J., Rock, T. & Ingram, J. C. Quantification
       of elemental contaminants in unregulated water across western
       Navajo Nation. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 16, 2727 (2019).
   33. Petersen, M. L., Porter, K. E., Gruber, S., Wang, Y. & van der
       Laan, M. J. Diagnosing and responding to violations in the
       positivity assumption. Stat. Methods Med. Res. 21, 31–54 (2012).
       Article  MathSciNet  PubMed  Google Scholar
   34. Zhang, L., Ma, Z. & Guo, L. An evaluation of spatial
       autocorrelation and heterogeneity in the residuals of six
       regression models. For. Sci. 55, 533–548 (2009).
       Google Scholar
   35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/ Agency for Toxic
       Substances and Disease Registry/ Geospatial Research, Analysis, and
       Services Program. 2010 Social Vulnerability Index database.
       https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/placeandhealth/svi/data_documentation_dow
       nload.html (2021).
   36. Adkins-Jackson, P. B., Chantarat, T., Bailey, Z. D. & Ponce, N. A.
       Measuring structural racism: a guide for epidemiologists and other
       health researchers. Am. J. Epidemiol. 191, 539–547 (2022).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   37. Bailey, Z. D. et al. Structural racism and health inequities in the
       USA: evidence and interventions. Lancet 389, 1453–1463 (2017).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   38. Wilson, S. M. Environmental justice movement: a review of history,
       research, and public health issues. J. Public. Manage. Soc. Policy
       16, 19–50 (2010).
   39. Bailey Z. D., Feldman J. M. & Bassett M. T. How structural racism
       works—racist policies as a root cause of US racial health
       inequities. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 768–773 (2021).
   40. Hernández, D. Sacrifice along the energy continuum: a call for
       energy justice. Environ. Justice 8, 151–156 (2015).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   41. Paradies, Y. et al. Racism as a determinant of health: a systematic
       review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 10, e0138511 (2015).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   42. Link, B. G. & Phelan J. Social conditions as fundamental causes of
       disease. J. Health Soc. Behav. 80–94 (1995).
   43. Phelan, J. C. & Link, B. G. Is racism a fundamental cause of
       inequalities in health? Annu. Rev. Sociol. 41, 311–330 (2015).
       Article  Google Scholar
   44. Krieger, N. & Sidney, S. Racial discrimination and blood pressure:
       the CARDIA Study of young black and white adults. Am. J. Public
       Health 86, 1370–1378 (1996).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   45. Kwate, N. O. & Goodman, M. S. Cross-sectional and longitudinal
       effects of racism on mental health among residents of Black
       neighborhoods in New York City. Am. J. Public Health 105, 711–718
       (2015).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   46. Nardone, A. et al. Associations between historical residential
       redlining and current age-adjusted rates of emergency department
       visits due to asthma across eight cities in California: an
       ecological study. Lancet Planet Health 4, e24–e31 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   47. Marsh, B., Parnell, A. M. & Joyner, A. M. Institutionalization of
       racial inequality in local political geographies. Urban Geogr. 31,
       691–709 (2010).
       Article  Google Scholar
   48. MacDonald Gibson, J., Fisher, M., Clonch, A., Macdonald, J. M. &
       Cook, P. J. Children drinking private well water have higher blood
       lead than those with city water. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117,
       16898–16907 (2020).
       Article  Google Scholar
   49. Nigra, A. E. Environmental racism and the need for private well
       protections. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 17476–17478 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   50. Del Toral, M. A., Porter, A. & Schock, M. R. Detection and
       evaluation of elevated lead release from service lines: a field
       study. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 9300–9307 (2013).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   51. Hanna-Attisha, M., LaChance, J., Sadler, R. C. & Champney Schnepp,
       A. Elevated blood lead levels in children associated with the flint
       drinking water crisis: a spatial analysis of risk and public health
       response. Am. J. Public Health 106, 283–290 (2016).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   52. Nigra, A. E. & Navas-Acien, A. Racial inequalities in drinking
       water lead exposure: a wake-up call to protect patients with end
       stage kidney disease. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 32, 2419–2421 (2021).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   53. United States Federal Register. National Primary Drinking Water
       Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions.
       https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/01/15/2020-28691/nat
       ional-primary-drinking-water-regulations-lead-and-copper-rule-revis
       ions (2021).
   54. Frey, W. H. Melting Pot Cities and Suburbs: Racial and Ethnic
       Change in Metro America in the 2000s. Brook Inst
       https://www.brookings.edu/research/melting-pot-cities-and-suburbs-r
       acial-and-ethnic-change-in-metro-america-in-the-2000s/ (2011).
   55. Cromartie, J. United Sates Department of Agriculture (USDA) Rural
       America at a Glance.
       http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=90555
       (2018).
   56. Maupin, M. A. et al. Estimated use of water in the United States in
       2010. Estimated Use Of Wa 9ter In The United States In 2010
       http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/cir1405 (2014).
   57. Dieter, C. A. et al. Estimated use of water in the United States in
       2015. Estimated Use Of Water In The United States In 2015. vol.
       1441 http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/cir1441, (2018).
   58. Ingram, J. C., Jones, L., Credo, J. & Rock, T. Uranium and arsenic
       unregulated water issues on Navajo lands. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A
       38, 031003 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   59. Murphy, M., Lewis, L., Sabogal, R. I. & Bell, C. Survey of
       unregulated drinking water sources on Navajo Nation. American
       Public Health Association 137th Annual Meeting and Exposition on
       Water and Public Health. Vol. 7 (2009).
   60. Stanley, D. M. & Wilkin, R. T. Solution equilibria of uranyl
       minerals: role of the common groundwater ions calcium and
       carbonate. J. Hazard Mater. 377, 315–320 (2019).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   61. Stewart, B. D., Mayes, M. A. & Fendorf, S. Impact of
       uranyl-calcium-carbonato complexes on uranium(VI) adsorption to
       synthetic and natural sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44, 928–934
       (2010).
       Article  PubMed  CAS  Google Scholar
   62. Kim, M.-J., Nriagu, J. & Haack, S. Carbonate ions and arsenic
       dissolution by groundwater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 34, 3094–3100
       (2000).
       Article  CAS  Google Scholar
   63. Bailey Kathryn, A. et al. Mechanisms underlying latent disease risk
       associated with early-life arsenic exposure: current research
       trends and scientific gaps. Environ. Health Perspect. 124, 170–175
       (2016).
       Article  PubMed  CAS  Google Scholar
   64. Sanchez, T. R. et al. A meta-analysis of arsenic exposure and lung
       function: is there evidence of restrictive or obstructive lung
       disease? Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 5, 244–254 (2018).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   65. Moody, E. C., Coca, S. G. & Sanders, A. P. Toxic metals and chronic
       kidney disease: a systematic review of recent literature. Curr.
       Environ. Health Rep. 5, 453–463 (2018).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   66. Dashner-Titus, E. J. et al. Metal exposure and oxidative stress
       markers in pregnant Navajo Birth Cohort Study participants. Free
       Radic. Biol. Med. 124, 484–492 (2018).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   67. Dinocourt, C., Legrand, M., Dublineau, I. & Lestaevel, P. The
       neurotoxicology of uranium. Toxicology 337, 58–71 (2015).
       Article  PubMed  CAS  Google Scholar
   68. Espey, D. K. et al. Annual report to the nation on the status of
       cancer, 1975–2004, featuring cancer in American Indians and Alaska
       Natives. Cancer 110, 2119–2152 (2007).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   69. Hoover, J. H. et al. Exposure to uranium and co-occurring metals
       among pregnant Navajo women. Environ. Res. 190, 109943 (2020).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  CAS  Google Scholar
   70. Casey, J. A. et al. Race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status,
       residential segregation, and spatial variation in noise exposure in
       the contiguous united states. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 077017
       (2017).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   71. Pace, C. et al. Inequities in drinking water quality among domestic
       well communities and community water systems, California,
       2011‒2019. Am. J. Public Health 112, 88–97 (2022).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   72. Schaider, L. A., Swetschinski, L., Campbell, C. & Rudel, R. A.
       Environmental justice and drinking water quality: are there
       socioeconomic disparities in nitrate levels in U.S. drinking water?
       Environ. Health 18, 3 (2019).
       Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   73. Lopez, R. Segregation and black/white differences in exposure to
       air toxics in 1990. Environ. Health Perspect. 110,, 289–295 (2002).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   74. Morello-Frosch, R., Pastor, M. & Sadd, J. Environmental justice and
       southern California’s “riskscape”: the distribution of air toxics
       exposures and health risks among diverse communities. Urban Aff.
       36, 551–578 (2001).
       Article  Google Scholar
   75. United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). EPA Awards
       Over $17 Million to Benefit Small Water Systems.
       https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-awards-over-17-million-benefit
       -small-water-systems, (2021).
   76. United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). Six-Year
       Review 3 Compliance Monitoring Data (2006–2011).
       https://www.epa.gov/dwsixyearreview/six-year-review-3-compliance-mo
       nitoring-data-2006-2011 (2016).
   77. United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). The analysis
       of regulated contaminant occurrence data from public water systems
       in support of the Third Six-Year Review of National Primary
       Drinking Water Regulations: Chemical Phase Rules and Radionuclides
       Rules.
       https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-12/documents/810r16014
       .pdf (2016).
   78. United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). Data
       Management and Quality Assurance/Quality Control Process for the
       Third Six-Year Review Information Collection Rule Dataset.
       https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi/P100QO9Q.PDF?Dockey=P100QO9Q.PD
       F (2016).
   79. United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). O.
       Information about Public Water Systems.
       https://www.epa.gov/dwreginfo/information-about-public-water-system
       s (2015).
   80. Duncan, D. T., Kawachi, I., White, K. & Williams, D. R. The
       geography of recreational open space: influence of neighborhood
       racial composition and neighborhood poverty. J. Urban Health 90,
       618–631 (2013).
       Article  PubMed  Google Scholar
   81. Florax, R. J. G. M. & Nijkamp, P. Misspecification in Linear
       Spatial Regression Models. Encyclopedia of Social Measurement
       (Elsevier, 2005).
   82. RDocumentation. lagsarlm function spdep (version 0.7-8)
       https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/spdep/versions/0.7-8/topics
       /lagsarlm (2018).
   83. Huang, Q., Liu, Y., Du, Y. & Garmire, L. X. Evaluation of cell type
       annotation r packages on single-cell rna-seq data. Genom. Proteom.
       Bioinform. 19, 267–281 (2021).
       Article  Google Scholar
   84. Gollini, I., Lu, B., Charlton, M., Brunsdon, C. & Harris, P.
       GWmodel: an R package for exploring spatial heterogeneity using
       geographically weighted models. Journal of Statistical Software 63,
       1–50 (2015).
   85. Martinez-Morata, I. et al. Nationwide geospatial analysis of county
       racial and ethnic composition and public drinking water arsenic and
       uranium. Geospatialanalysis_CWS_race-ethinicity_us.
       https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7301984 (2022).

   Download references

Acknowledgements

   Research reported in this publication was supported by the Office Of
   The Director, National Institutes Of Health and the National Institute
   Of Dental & Craniofacial Research, under Award Number DP5OD031849
   (AEN), by National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS)
   grant 2T32ES007322 (AEN), NIEHS grant P300ES009089 (AEN, ANA, BCB),
   NIEHS grant P42 ES033719 (AEN, ANA, BCB), and by a fellowship from La
   Caixa Foundation (ID100010434), fellowship code LCF/BQ/AA20/11820032
   (IMM). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
   not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes
   of Health.

Author information

Authors and Affiliations

    1. Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Columbia University
       Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY, USA
       Irene Martinez-Morata, Maya Spaur, Kevin P. Patterson, Ana
       Navas-Acien & Anne E. Nigra
    2. Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University, Palisades,
       NY, USA
       Benjamin C. Bostick
    3. School of Sustainable Engineering and the Built Environment,
       Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
       Otakuye Conroy-Ben
    4. Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of
       Public Health, New York, NY, USA
       Dustin T. Duncan & Seth J. Prins
    5. Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
       Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
       Miranda R. Jones

   Authors
    1. Irene Martinez-Morata
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    2. Benjamin C. Bostick
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    3. Otakuye Conroy-Ben
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    4. Dustin T. Duncan
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    5. Miranda R. Jones
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    6. Maya Spaur
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    7. Kevin P. Patterson
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    8. Seth J. Prins
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    9. Ana Navas-Acien
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
   10. Anne E. Nigra
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar

Contributions

   I.M.M.: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation,
   writing (original draft), writing (review and editing), validation, and
   visualization. B.C.B.: methodology and writing (review and editing).
   O.C.B.: methodology and writing (review and editing). D.T.D:
   methodology and writing (review and editing). M.R.J.: methodology and
   writing (review and editing). K.P.P.: methodology and writing (review
   and editing). M.S.: methodology and writing (review and editing).
   S.J.P.: methodology and writing (review and editing). A.N.A.:
   conceptualization, methodology, and writing (review and editing).
   A.E.N.: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation,
   writing (original draft), writing (review and editing), validation, and
   visualization.

Corresponding author

   Correspondence to Irene Martinez-Morata.

Ethics declarations

Competing interests

   The authors declare no competing interests.

Peer review

Peer review information

   Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for their
   contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are
   available.

Additional information

   Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
   jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary information

Supplementary Information

Peer Review File

Reporting Summary

Rights and permissions

   Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
   Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
   adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
   long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
   source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
   changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
   article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
   indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
   not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your
   intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
   permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
   copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

   Reprints and Permissions

About this article

   Verify currency and authenticity via CrossMark

Cite this article

   Martinez-Morata, I., Bostick, B.C., Conroy-Ben, O. et al. Nationwide
   geospatial analysis of county racial and ethnic composition and public
   drinking water arsenic and uranium. Nat Commun 13, 7461 (2022).
   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-35185-6

   Download citation
     * Received: 03 March 2022
     * Accepted: 22 November 2022
     * Published: 03 December 2022
     * DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-35185-6

Share this article

   Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
   content:
   (BUTTON) Get shareable link

   Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

   (BUTTON) Copy to clipboard

   Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

Comments

   By submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community
   Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with
   our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate.

   Download PDF

   Advertisement
   Advertisement

Explore content

     * Research articles
     * Reviews & Analysis
     * News & Comment
     * Videos
     * Collections
     * Subjects

     * Follow us on Facebook
     * Follow us on Twitter
     * Sign up for alerts
     * RSS feed

About the journal

     * Aims & Scope
     * Editors
     * Journal Information
     * Open access
     * Calls for Papers
     * Editorial Values Statement
     * Journal Metrics
     * Editors' Highlights
     * Contact
     * Editorial policies
     * Top Articles

Publish with us

     * For authors
     * For Reviewers
     * Language editing services
     * Submit manuscript

Search

   Search articles by subject, keyword or author
   ____________________
   Show results from [All journals]
   (BUTTON) Search
   Advanced search

Quick links

     * Explore articles by subject
     * Find a job
     * Guide to authors
     * Editorial policies

   Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online)

nature.com sitemap

About Nature Portfolio

     * About us
     * Press releases
     * Press office
     * Contact us

Discover content

     * Journals A-Z
     * Articles by subject
     * Nano
     * Protocol Exchange
     * Nature Index

Publishing policies

     * Nature portfolio policies
     * Open access

Author & Researcher services

     * Reprints & permissions
     * Research data
     * Language editing
     * Scientific editing
     * Nature Masterclasses
     * Nature Research Academies
     * Research Solutions

Libraries & institutions

     * Librarian service & tools
     * Librarian portal
     * Open research
     * Recommend to library

Advertising & partnerships

     * Advertising
     * Partnerships & Services
     * Media kits
     * Branded content

Career development

     * Nature Careers
     * Nature Conferences
     * Nature events

Regional websites

     * Nature Africa
     * Nature China
     * Nature India
     * Nature Italy
     * Nature Japan
     * Nature Korea
     * Nature Middle East

     * Privacy Policy
     * Use of cookies
     * (BUTTON) Manage cookies/Do not sell my data
     * Legal notice
     * Accessibility statement
     * Terms & Conditions
     * California Privacy Statement

   Springer Nature

   © 2022 Springer Nature Limited

   (BUTTON) Close banner Close
   Nature Briefing

   Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science,
   free to your inbox daily.
   Email address
   ____________________ (BUTTON) Sign up
   [ ] I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the
   Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.
   (BUTTON) Close banner Close
   Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox.
   Sign up for Nature Briefing
