   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-M2X5VXQ

   Matches (4)
   BAN v IND (1)
   BBL (1)
   Super Smash (1)
   LPL (1)
   (BUTTON) Previous
   Bet 365
   Stumps • 2nd TEST •  Mirpur
   BAN Flag

   BAN
   227 & 231
   IND Flag

   IND
   (23 ov, T:145) 314 & 45/4

   Day 3 - India need 100 runs.
   ScheduleReportSeries
   RESULT • 14th Match • BBL •  T20 •  Hobart
   HH Flag

   HH
   122
   MR Flag

   MR
   (19.2/20 ov, T:123) 114

   Hurricanes won by 8 runs
   ScheduleTableReportSeries
   RESULT • 2nd Match • Super Smash •  T20 •  Wellington
   WELL Flag

   WELL
   152/8
   OTAGO Flag

   OTAGO
   (20 ov, T:153) 144/7

   Wellington won by 8 runs
   ScheduleTableSeries
   RESULT • Final • LPL •  T20 •  Colombo (RPS)
   CS Flag

   CS
   163/5
   JK Flag

   JK
   (19.2/20 ov, T:164) 164/8

   Kings won by 2 wickets (with 4 balls remaining)
   ScheduleTableReportSeries
   (BUTTON) Next
   ESPNcricinfo
   Live Scores
   Series
   Teams
   News
   Features
   Videos
   Stats
   IPL Auction
   Edition UK
     * Terminated contractor files case against USA Cricket for 'racial
       discrimination'
       7mPeter Della Penna
     * Mehidy picks up three as India stutter in 145-run chase
       7hMohammad Isam
     * Is Rishabh Pant the GWOAT?
       23hSidharth Monga
     * Bangladesh let India slip from their grasp, literally
       22hMohammad Isam
     * The big questions from the IPL auction: why didn't Sunrisers
       splurge on an allrounder? Who is CSK's next death bowler?
       11minVishal Dikshit
     * 2023 IPL auction: The list of sold and unsold players
       1dSrinidhi Ramanujam
     * Sam Curran becomes most expensive player in IPL history
       1dShashank Kishore
     * IPL auction 2023: How the 10 teams stack up
       19hESPNcricinfo staff
     * Auction stats: Curran and Green go past Morris; Brook's record; and
       a debutant from Ireland
       10hSampath Bandarupalli
     * 'Happy and humbled' Sikandar Raza caps dream year with IPL deal
       21hMohammad Isam
     * Vivrant Sharma lives his brother's dream with Sunrisers Hyderabad
       IPL deal
       19hShashank Kishore
     * Stuart Broad, Matt Potts, Dan Lawrence back in England Test squad
       for New Zealand tour
       1dESPNcricinfo staff
     * IPL auction 2023: How the 10 teams stack up
       19hESPNcricinfo staff
     * Shahid Afridi named interim chief selector of Pakistan men's team
       3hUmar Farooq
     * Ahead of milestone 100th Test, Warner vows to play like his old
       self
       6hAlex Malcolm
     * Second Pakistan vs New Zealand Test moved from Multan to Karachi
       because of weather concerns
       2hESPNcricinfo staff
     * Avishka, Samarawickrama lead Jaffna Kings to third straight LPL
       title
       10hMadushka Balasuriya
     * Roland Butcher appointed to West Indies selection panel
       21hESPNcricinfo staff
     * Ahead of milestone 100th Test, Warner vows to play like his old
       self
       6hAlex Malcolm
     * Warner's best in Tests: Carrying the bat, defying grief, and the
       triple century
       5hAlex Malcolm
     * David Warner: a giant among openers, among the best Test batters at
       his peak
       4hShiva Jayaraman
     * Warner on leadership ban saga: 'From the CA point of view, I didn't
       really have any support'
       7hAndrew McGlashan
     * Boland 'trying to push' to get a spot in Boxing Day XI as selection
       dilemma continues
       1dAlex Malcolm

   News

Terminated contractor files case against USA Cricket for 'racial
discrimination'

   The lawsuit, filed by Kirk Greaves, seeks a total of $2 million dollars
   in damages
   Peter Della Penna
   Peter Della Penna
   13-May-2022
   Kirk Greaves (C) was terminated from an independent contractor role
   early last month, Lauderhill, December 23, 2021

   Kirk Greaves (middle) on December 23, 2021, in Lauderhill, Florida, at
   a T20I between USA and Ireland  •  Peter Della Penna
   In the midst of a protracted legal battle regarding the delayed general
   elections from 2020, USA Cricket now has a second lawsuit on its hands
   after Kirk Greaves, who was terminated from an independent-contractor
   role early last month, filed legal action in the US Federal Court
   against the national governing body claiming "racial discrimination in
   employment".
   The lawsuit, which was filed by Greaves on April 28 in the Northern
   District of California (USA Cricket is headquartered in San Francisco)
   is seeking a total of $2 million dollars in damages: $150,000 in
   economic damages owing to lost future wages; $350,000 in non-economic
   damages for "psychological stress and humiliation"; and $1.5 million in
   punitive damages.
   "USA Cricket is aware of various details of a lawsuit being brought by
   a former contractor against USA Cricket," a USA Cricket spokesperson
   said to ESPNcricinfo in an emailed statement. "The individual is one of
   a number of contractors previously engaged by USA Cricket whose
   contracts were recently not renewed. All allegations in the lawsuit are
   entirely false and without merit, and USA Cricket denies and will
   aggressively defend against them. The matter is currently in the hands
   of USA Cricket's lawyers. We look forward to the case being dismissed
   in due course and will not be making any further comment at this time."
   Prior to working for USA Cricket, Greaves, a native of Barbados, worked
   as Team Operations Manager for Barbados Tridents for three seasons in
   the Caribbean Premier League from 2016 to 2018. He was also appointed
   as Tournament Operations Manager for the Global T20 Canada when it
   launched in 2018 and worked in an operations role for Rajasthan Royals
   during the 2019 IPL. According to the lawsuit, Greaves claims he was
   brought on board by USA Cricket as an independent contractor for a
   four-month probationary period as a Cricket Operations Manager
   beginning in March 2021 at an initial wage of $5,000 per month and
   tasked with executing four domestic cricket tournaments.
   Greaves claims a verbal agreement was in place with then board CEO Iain
   Higgins to give him an offer of full-time employment, contingent upon
   the successful completion of the four domestic tournaments. However,
   Greaves was never subsequently presented with a full-time job offer and
   claims that the budget which was allegedly allocated for the role was
   instead repackaged as an increased salary offer to a white employee.
   Among other allegations, Greaves states that he was subjected to a
   "toxic work environment, unfair employment practices, wage disparity
   and discrimination". Greaves claims that he was the only black staff
   member and also the only American citizen on staff and, as such, he was
   "hired to diversify the management of USA Cricket. It would appear that
   only the Australians, Indians, New Zealanders and other non-Americans
   have benefitted from the USA Cricket brand".
   Though their employment status is not considered full-time, USA Cricket
   currently has three other black men - who are all American citizens -
   serving in staff leadership roles affiliated with its national teams:
   John Aaron as USA Women's national team manager, Kerk Higgins as USA
   men's national team manager, and Kevin Darlington in the dual role of
   USA men's assistant coach and USA U-19 men's head coach.
   Greaves also claims in the suit that he suffered humiliation after
   having his role reclassified from "Cricket Operations Manager" to
   "Events Manager", and that the renaming of his role resulted in
   "eliminating any element of black representation at the senior
   management level", something he claims "was racially orchestrated and
   violated US law". Greaves also writes that his job status was that of a
   permanent employee but claims that classifying him as an independent
   contractor "demonstrates bad faith and is a contravention of US labor
   laws".
   On March 28, a letter was sent by USA Cricket Operations Director
   Richard Done to Greaves notifying him that his independent contractor
   agreement - which had been $6,500 for the final five months, an
   increase of $1,500 above his original - was being terminated as of
   April 8, "pursuant to the decision of the Cricket Committee". However,
   Greaves claims that he received an email disputing this from USA
   Cricket board member Srini Salver. In the email, which is attached in
   an exhibit as part of the lawsuit filing, Salver writes to Greaves that
   "your termination was never recommended by the Cricket Committee" in
   any board meeting but was instead discussed during a conversation about
   budgets.
   "The budget isn't approved, nor are the terminations," Salver allegedly
   wrote to Greaves. Salver is one of the two board member plaintiffs,
   along with Venu Pisike, in the ongoing legal action filed against five
   other USA board members and then USA Cricket CEO Iain Higgins over the
   legality of new members being allowed voting status in the case about
   the delayed elections from 2020.
   A court hearing date for the Greaves lawsuit has been set for August 2.
   United States of America

   Peter Della Penna is ESPNcricinfo's USA correspondent @PeterDellaPenna
   Terms of Use  •  Privacy Policy  •  Interest-Based Ads  •  EU Privacy
   Rights  •  Cookie Policy  •  Feedback
