   #search nature.com nature.com

   IFRAME: https://collect.nature.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MRVXSHQ

   Skip to main content

   Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with
   limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend
   you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
   Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we
   are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript.

   Advertisement
   Advertisement

   Nature Communications
     * View all journals
     * Search
     * Log in

     * Explore content
     * About the journal
     * Publish with us

     * Sign up for alerts
     * RSS feed

    1. nature

     nature communications

     comment

     article

   Opportunities to tackle structural racism and ethnicity-based
   discrimination in recovering and rebuilding from the COVID-19 pandemic
   Download PDF

   Your article has downloaded

Similar articles being viewed by others

   (BUTTON)

   Carousel with three slides shown at a time. Use the Previous and Next
   buttons to navigate three slides at a time, or the slide dot buttons at
   the end to jump three slides at a time.

Emerging approaches to redressing multi-level racism and reproductive health
disparities

   04 November 2022

   Bethany Golden, Ifeyinwa V. Asiodu, … Monica R. McLemore

Capturing the COVID-19 Crisis through Public Health and Social Measures Data
Science

   26 August 2022

   Cindy Cheng, Amélie Desvars-Larrive, … Sophia Alison Zweig

Association of Republican partisanship with US citizens’ mobility during the
first period of the COVID crisis

   30 May 2022

   Guillaume Barbalat & Nicolas Franck

Questioning white losses and anti-white discrimination in the United States

   09 December 2019

   Megan Earle & Gordon Hodson

Protective Policy Index (PPI) global dataset of origins and stringency of
COVID 19 mitigation policies

   16 June 2022

   Olga Shvetsova, Andrei Zhirnov, … Tianyi Zhao

National identity predicts public health support during a global pandemic

   26 January 2022

   Jay J. Van Bavel, Aleksandra Cichocka, … Paulo S. Boggio

Disaggregating data by race allows for more accurate research

   30 July 2019

   Rhonda Vonshay Sharpe

The human costs of COVID-19 policy failures in India

   26 May 2021

   Vipin Bahadur Singh

COVIDiSTRESS diverse dataset on psychological and behavioural outcomes one
year into the COVID-19 pandemic

   21 June 2022

   Angélique M. Blackburn, Sara Vestergren & the COVIDiSTRESS II
   Consortium

   Download PDF

     * Comment
     * Open Access
     * Published: 14 June 2022

Opportunities to tackle structural racism and ethnicity-based discrimination
in recovering and rebuilding from the COVID-19 pandemic

     * Natalia Linos^1,
     * Mary T. Bassett^1,
     * Alejandra Salemi^1,
     * Margareta Matache^1,
     * Konstantinos Tararas  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1687-9780^2,
     * Rodney Kort  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-7587-9302^3,
     * Susana Gomez  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0030-6328^3,
     * Michela Zaghi^2,
     * Rosemary Lane^4,
     * Brianna Harrison^5,
     * Karin Lucke^6,
     * Gianna Sanchez  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3330-8602^7,
     * Anne Althaus  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6133-857X^7,
     * Mirna P. Amaya  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5548-6744^3 &
     * …
     * Theadora Swift Koller  ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5655-7690^3

   (BUTTON) Show authors

   Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 3277 (2022) Cite this
   article
     * 1906 Accesses
     * 21 Altmetric
     * Metrics details

Subjects

     * Decision making
     * Public health

   The impact of COVID-19 has been disproportionately felt by populations
   experiencing structural racial- and ethnicity-based discrimination.
   Here, we describe opportunities for COVID-19 response and recovery
   efforts to help build more equal and resilient societies, through
   investments in: (i) interventions focused on explicitly addressing
   racial and ethnicity-based discrimination; (ii) interventions
   supporting the delivery of universal services, and in ways that address
   compounding and intersecting drivers of exclusion and marginalization;
   and (iii) cross-cutting enabling measures, such as participatory
   mechanisms and data disaggregation.

   More than two years since the first SARS-CoV-2 infections were
   reported, the COVID-19 pandemic remains an acute global emergency^1.
   While many countries have successfully vaccinated significant portions
   of their populations, stark global inequities remain with imbalance in
   the global distribution of vaccines^2,3, and potential new variants
   could further threaten the ability of governments to recover from the
   inter-connected health, economic, and broader human rights crises.
   Within countries, the impact of COVID-19 has been disproportionately
   felt by populations experiencing structural racial- and ethnicity-based
   discrimination. Indeed, where disaggregated epidemiologic data are
   available, COVID-19 morbidity and mortality rates are often
   significantly higher among people of African descent, indigenous
   peoples, and ethnic groups or other minoritized groups experiencing
   discrimination^4,5,6. This reflects what social epidemiologists have
   long recognized: disease distribution is patterned by structures of
   disadvantage, inequality, marginalization and discrimination that often
   have historical roots and still have present-day manifestations^7.
   Importantly, “race” is purely a social construct that has no biological
   basis, and documented racial inequities are due to racism not genetics
   or biology.

   Ethnicity-based and racial discrimination intersects with other forms
   of exclusion based on income, occupation, gender identity and
   expression, sexual orientation, disability, religion or belief,
   language, migratory status, rural/urban status and more, and is
   unlikely to exist in only one sector. Beyond health inequities,
   COVID-19 racial and ethnicity-based inequities have been documented
   across employment, education, housing and food insecurity, among other
   domains^8. There are different pathways – from differential exposure,
   to inequitable access to health services, to uneven socioeconomic
   impacts of control measures, that can be further studied to inform
   policymaking, planning and programming^9. Yet, these unequal impacts
   and human rights violations are not inevitable; neither is a spike in
   xenophobia and hate speech^10.

   As countries work to respond to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and
   address both health challenges and broader socio-economic impacts,
   attention must be given to tackling racial and ethnic discrimination.
   With this in mind, and consistent with the UN Secretary General’s Call
   to Action for Human Rights^11, members of the United Nations
   Sustainable Development Group released a report on opportunities to
   address racial- and ethnicity-based discrimination^12.

   The report was developed through a consultative process that began in
   late 2020 through early 2021, involving UN senior executives and
   technical staff, civil society, public health practitioners and human
   rights experts. It identified three strategic approaches to addressing
   racial and ethnicity-based discrimination in COVID-19 response and
   recovery efforts. These are: (i) interventions explicitly tackling
   racial and ethnicity-based discrimination, including improving
   anti-discrimination and redress mechanisms; (ii) interventions
   supporting the delivery of universal services, but in ways that address
   compounding and intersecting drivers of social exclusion and draw on
   the framework of proportionate universalism^13; and (iii) investments
   in cross-cutting enabling measures, such as participatory mechanisms
   and data disaggregation (see Table 1 which is replicated from the
   report).
   Table 1 Summary of potential entry points to address racial- and
   ethnicity-based discrimination, replicated from UN report.
   Full size table

   While not exhaustive and recognizing that entry-points would need to be
   tailored to national circumstances and developed in consultation with
   impacted communities, these mutually reinforcing entry-points together
   offer a framework to address discrimination directly through targeted
   measures, and indirectly through universal measures that will have
   amplified impacts on disadvantaged populations. This framework is
   currently being used in a capacity-building programme for United
   Nations Country Teams to support national policies and programmes that
   result in more just, equal and resilient societies. To date, thirteen
   UN Country Teams have participated in the programme and a
   training-of-trainers is planned for late 2022 to reach more, under the
   umbrella of the UN Network on addressing Racial Discrimination and the
   Protection of Minorities.

Explicitly tackle racial and ethnicity-based discrimination

   COVID-19 made clear that there is a need for explicit policies to
   tackle racial and ethnicity-based discrimination in the immediate term,
   to address current pressing needs, and in the long term. The
   longstanding impact of colonialism, theft of land, resources and
   exclusionary actions, for example, left indigenous peoples more
   vulnerable to COVID-19. Indigenous peoples already faced numerous
   obstacles to equitably accessing health services, including because of
   geographical barriers posed by the organization of provider networks,
   difficulty affording medical care, or difficulties in accessing
   culturally appropriate care that is in their own language and that
   respects their cultural beliefs, traditions and practices^14. During
   the COVID-19 pandemic the world also witnessed a rise in episodes of
   xenophobia, hate speech, abuses, assaults, harassment, scapegoating,
   stigmatization and increase in excessive immigration control
   measures^15.

   Countries can use this opportunity of heightened sensitivity to health
   inequities to adopt or strengthen existing anti-discrimination laws and
   policies that align with international human rights standards. These
   should extend beyond health care to address discrimination in the
   workplace, housing, education, law enforcement and border control
   sectors, among others. States must meet their obligations to respect,
   protect and fulfill the rights of everyone guaranteed under the
   International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial
   Discrimination by, for example, equipping existing autonomous national
   institutions to guarantee protection, effective implementation of
   anti-discrimination laws and policies, and access to justice for
   individual or collective complaints.

   Accurate communications and public messages centered on solidarity,
   tolerance, and inclusion are needed to combat scapegoating, ‘othering’
   or victim-blaming narratives that continue to exacerbate harm. Just as
   with past epidemics which have often resulted in human rights abuses
   and discriminatory enforcement of public health measures, as well as
   segregationist public health strategies^16, concerns were raised around
   emergency measures inappropriately targeting groups, including
   migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, and the excessive and selective
   use of police and military for enforcement^17. For example,
   longstanding anti-Roma racism in Europe, including violent and targeted
   oppression over centuries, resurfaced through inflammatory rhetoric and
   scapegoating during COVID-19^18.

Addressing compounding and intersecting drivers of exclusion

   COVID-19 made inequities experienced by persons facing ethnicity-based
   and racial discrimination more visible, but unfair and discriminatory
   practices in education, housing, labor markets, the criminal justice
   system, to name a few, are often overlapping and compounding, and did
   not emerge simply as a result of the pandemic. Universal and
   rights-based strategies such as temporary moratoria on evictions^19,
   expanded social protection nets, enhanced labor protections including
   for workers in the informal economy, expansion of free Wi-Fi and open
   education resources, release and decarceration efforts – among other
   measures – can have a differential positive impact on populations
   experiencing racial and ethnicity-based discrimination. This is because
   structural racism acts to skew distributions such that excluded and
   marginalized groups are over-represented among those working in the
   informal economy, those facing housing insecurity, those deprived of
   education, those living in poverty and those facing obstacles to
   justice. An intersectional analysis to comprehensively address the
   multiple and overlapping structural drivers of inequality, for example
   with regards to gender identity, religion, ableness, or citizenship
   status, in addition to race and ethnicity, is essential in COVID-19
   recovery plans.

   Place-based strategies^20, including neighborhood and community-based
   interventions, can similarly help mitigate the disproportionate impact
   of COVID-19 in geographic regions that have historically been
   underserved and contain large numbers of people that may have
   experienced racial and ethnicity-based discrimination. For example,
   investments in infrastructure, including health infrastructure, can
   help to ensure basic minimum needs for shelter, health, water,
   sanitation and hygiene are being met during and following the pandemic,
   while also generating employment opportunities in the immediate term
   for residents of underserved areas.

Invest in enabling and human rights-based approaches

   Although there are both direct and indirect strategies through which
   plans to build forward better from the COVID-19 pandemic can begin to
   address structural racism and ethnicity-based discrimination, as
   described above, these actions will only be successful if they address
   power inequities and are developed through participatory and inclusive
   approaches, ensuring historically excluded communities have
   decision-making power and adequate resources. COVID-19 response and
   recovery plans could earmark resources for civil society organizations
   working to address discrimination, social exclusion and human rights.

   In the immediate term, investments in systems to disaggregate data by
   race and/or ethnicity, as well as other dimensions that can help
   address the intersectional impact on particular groups, are needed. It
   is essential that these are accompanied by investments in data
   protection. These investments and other equity analysis tools can help
   unpack inequalities across groups both as a direct result of COVID-19
   and because of unevenly distributed impacts of pandemic-related
   measures and uneven socioeconomic consequences. Importantly, mechanisms
   for transparent data reporting that allow for public accountability
   will be critical. In many contexts, investment in vital statistics and
   civil registration will also be needed, since the pandemic highlighted
   that many people in need of emergency social protection were unable to
   access benefits because they lacked proper identification^21.
   Similarly, efforts should be made to ensure that the needs of those
   with precarious legal identity status are also met.

Conclusion

   Inequalities in who gets sick and who suffers long-term socioeconomic
   consequences during and following a pandemic are largely shaped by
   unequal political power dynamics and how societies structure their
   economies, laws and policies and broader governance mechanisms. This
   tragic pandemic has further shone the light on grave and historic
   injustices and inequalities, both within and across countries, and
   should be an impetus for countries to strengthen their efforts to
   address systemic racism and ethnicity-based discrimination. Lessons
   learned from the COVID-19 pandemic also include the importance of
   prevention and the high cost of inaction. Parallels can easily be drawn
   around the need for urgent and concerted action to address the climate
   emergency if we are to prevent the unnecessary and unequal health
   impact of climate change^22. This opportunity should not be wasted.

References

    1. World Health Organization. Strategic preparedness, readiness and
       response plan to end the global COVID-19 emergency in 2022 (World
       Health Organization, Geneva, 2022) (WHO/WHE/SPP/2022.01).
    2. Kavanagh, M. M., Gostin, L. O. & Sunder, M. Sharing technology and
       vaccine doses to address global vaccine inequity and end the
       COVID-19 pandemic. JAMA 326, 219–220 (2021).
       Article  CAS  Google Scholar
    3. World Health Organization. Vaccine equity campaign. (WHO, 2021).
       https://www.who.int/campaigns/vaccine-equity.
    4. Shadmi, E. et al. Health equity and COVID-19: global perspectives.
       Int. J. Equity Health 19, 104 (2020).
    5. Sze, S. et al. Ethnicity and clinical outcomes in COVID-19: A
       systematic review and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 29, 100630
       (2020).
    6. Yaya, S., Yeboah, H., Charles, C. H., Otu, A. & Labonte, R. Ethnic
       and racial disparities in COVID-19-related deaths: counting the
       trees, hiding the forest. BMJ Global Health 5, e002913 (2020).
    7. Bailey, Z. D. et al. Structural racism and health inequities in the
       USA: evidence and interventions. Lancet 389, 1453–1463 (2017).
       Article  Google Scholar
    8. Paremoer L, Nandi S, Serag H & Baum F. Covid-19 pandemic and the
       social determinants of health. BMJ 372, n129 (2021).
    9. Katikireddi, S. V. et al. Unequal impact of COVID-19 crisis on
       minority ethnic groups: a framework for understanding and
       addressing inequalities. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 75, 970–974
       (2021).
       Article  Google Scholar
   10. Krieger, N. Does racism harm health? Did child abuse exist before
       1962? On explicit questions, critical science, and current
       controversies: an ecosocial perspective. Am. J. Public Health 93,
       194–199 (2003).
       Article  PubMed Central  Google Scholar
   11. United Nations. The highest aspiration: a call to action for human
       rights (United Nations, 2020).
   12. World Health Organization. Frontier dialogue consultations on
       addressing structural racial and ethnicity-based discrimination:
       key action areas for COVID-19 recovery plans (World Health
       Organization, 2021).
   13. Francis-Oliviero, F., Cambon, L., Wittwer, J., Marmot, M. & Alla,
       F. Theoretical and practical challenges of proportionate
       universalism: a review. Pan Am. J. Public Health. 44, e110 (2020).
   14. International Labour Organization. COVID-19 and the world of work:
       a focus on indigenous and tribal peoples (International Labour
       Organization, 2020).
   15. Guadagno, L. Migrants and the COVID-19 pandemic: an initial
       analysis. Migration Research Series N° 60, 5 (International
       Organization for Migration (IOM), 2020).
   16. Finn, B. M. & Kobayashi, L. C. Structural inequality in the time of
       COVID-19: urbanization, segregation, and pandemic control in
       sub-Saharan Africa. Dialogues Hum. Geogr. 10, 217–220 (2020).
       Article  Google Scholar
   17. Linos, N. & Bassett, M. T. Public health calls for solidarity, not
       warfare (Foreign Affairs, 2020).
   18. Matache, M., Leaning, J. & Bhabha, J. The shameful resurgence of
       violent scapegoating in a time of crisis (Open Democracy, 2020).
   19. Nande, A. et al. The effect of eviction moratoria on the
       transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Commun. 12, 2274 (2021).
   20. Henson, R. M. et al. Evaluating the health effects of place-based
       slum upgrading physical environment interventions: a systematic
       review (2012–2018). Social Sci. Med. 261, 113102 (2020).
   21. World Justice Project. The COVID-19 pandemic and the global justice
       gap (World Justice Project, 2020).
   22. World Health Organization. Climate change and health (World Health
       Organization, 2020).

   Download references

Acknowledgements

   This commentary is based on a report of outcomes from a series of
   consultations led by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United
   Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in
   coordination with the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner
   for Human Rights (OHCHR), the International Organization for Migration
   (IOM), the United Nations Development Coordination Office (UNDCO) and
   the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA).
   The consultations were convened under the umbrella of United Nations
   Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG) Task Team on Leave No One Behind,
   the Human Rights and the Normative Agenda, October 2020 to February
   2021, with followup training activities for UN Country Teams in October
   2021. With oversight from a dedicated project steering group comprised
   of members from the above agencies, this report was commissioned to the
   François-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and Human Rights at Harvard
   University. The report’s production was financed via a grant from the
   Government of Norway to WHO for work on gender, equity and human
   rights.

Author information

Authors and Affiliations

    1. FXB Center for Health and Human Rights, Harvard University, 677
       Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA
       Natalia Linos, Mary T. Bassett, Alejandra Salemi & Margareta
       Matache
    2. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 7
       Place de Fontenoy, 75352, Paris Cedex 07, France
       Konstantinos Tararas & Michela Zaghi
    3. World Health Organization, Avenue Appia 20, 1211, Geneva,
       Switzerland
       Rodney Kort, Susana Gomez, Mirna P. Amaya & Theadora Swift Koller
    4. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, New York,
       NY, 10017, USA
       Rosemary Lane
    5. United Nations Development Coordination Office, 405 East 42nd
       Street, New York, NY, 10017, USA
       Brianna Harrison
    6. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
       New York, NY, 10017, USA
       Karin Lucke
    7. International Migration Law Unit, International Organization for
       Migration, 17 Route des Morillons, 1211, Geneva 19, Switzerland
       Gianna Sanchez & Anne Althaus

   Authors
    1. Natalia Linos
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    2. Mary T. Bassett
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    3. Alejandra Salemi
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    4. Margareta Matache
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    5. Konstantinos Tararas
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    6. Rodney Kort
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    7. Susana Gomez
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    8. Michela Zaghi
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
    9. Rosemary Lane
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
   10. Brianna Harrison
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
   11. Karin Lucke
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
   12. Gianna Sanchez
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
   13. Anne Althaus
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
   14. Mirna P. Amaya
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
   15. Theadora Swift Koller
       View author publications
       You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar

Contributions

   N.L. took the lead in framing and drafting the article with text
   contributions and critical feedback from M.T.B. and T.S.K. and
   coordination support from S.G. and A.S. The recommendations presented
   stem from the Frontier Dialogue consultations which were conceptualized
   and overseen by T.S.K. and K.T., and analysis undertaken in drafting
   the FD final report developed jointly with M.T.B., N.L., A.S. with
   technical orientations and text contributions from a dedicated steering
   group involving also S.G., R.K., M.Z., R.L., B.H., K.L., G.S., A.A.,
   M.M. and M.A.

Corresponding author

   Correspondence to Theadora Swift Koller.

Ethics declarations

Competing interests

   The authors declare no competing interests.

Peer review

Peer review information

   Nature Communications thanks Srinivasa Katikireddi for their
   contribution to the peer review of this work.

Additional information

   Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
   jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Rights and permissions

   Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
   Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
   adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
   long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
   source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
   changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
   article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
   indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
   not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your
   intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
   permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
   copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

   Reprints and Permissions

About this article

   Verify currency and authenticity via CrossMark

Cite this article

   Linos, N., Bassett, M.T., Salemi, A. et al. Opportunities to tackle
   structural racism and ethnicity-based discrimination in recovering and
   rebuilding from the COVID-19 pandemic. Nat Commun 13, 3277 (2022).
   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30791-w

   Download citation
     * Received: 14 September 2021
     * Accepted: 18 May 2022
     * Published: 14 June 2022
     * DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30791-w

Share this article

   Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
   content:
   (BUTTON) Get shareable link

   Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

   (BUTTON) Copy to clipboard

   Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

   Download PDF

   Advertisement
   Advertisement

Explore content

     * Research articles
     * Reviews & Analysis
     * News & Comment
     * Videos
     * Collections
     * Subjects

     * Follow us on Facebook
     * Follow us on Twitter
     * Sign up for alerts
     * RSS feed

About the journal

     * Aims & Scope
     * Editors
     * Journal Information
     * Open access
     * Calls for Papers
     * Editorial Values Statement
     * Journal Metrics
     * Editors' Highlights
     * Contact
     * Editorial policies
     * Top Articles

Publish with us

     * For authors
     * For Reviewers
     * Language editing services
     * Submit manuscript

Search

   Search articles by subject, keyword or author
   ____________________
   Show results from [All journals]
   (BUTTON) Search
   Advanced search

Quick links

     * Explore articles by subject
     * Find a job
     * Guide to authors
     * Editorial policies

   Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online)

nature.com sitemap

About Nature Portfolio

     * About us
     * Press releases
     * Press office
     * Contact us

Discover content

     * Journals A-Z
     * Articles by subject
     * Nano
     * Protocol Exchange
     * Nature Index

Publishing policies

     * Nature portfolio policies
     * Open access

Author & Researcher services

     * Reprints & permissions
     * Research data
     * Language editing
     * Scientific editing
     * Nature Masterclasses
     * Nature Research Academies
     * Research Solutions

Libraries & institutions

     * Librarian service & tools
     * Librarian portal
     * Open research
     * Recommend to library

Advertising & partnerships

     * Advertising
     * Partnerships & Services
     * Media kits
     * Branded content

Career development

     * Nature Careers
     * Nature Conferences
     * Nature events

Regional websites

     * Nature Africa
     * Nature China
     * Nature India
     * Nature Italy
     * Nature Japan
     * Nature Korea
     * Nature Middle East

     * Privacy Policy
     * Use of cookies
     * (BUTTON) Manage cookies/Do not sell my data
     * Legal notice
     * Accessibility statement
     * Terms & Conditions
     * California Privacy Statement

   Springer Nature

   © 2022 Springer Nature Limited

   (BUTTON) Close banner Close
   Nature Briefing

   Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science,
   free to your inbox daily.
   Email address
   ____________________ (BUTTON) Sign up
   [ ] I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the
   Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.
   (BUTTON) Close banner Close
   Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox.
   Sign up for Nature Briefing
