   #Legal Defense Fund » Feed Legal Defense Fund » Comments Feed alternate

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MCKBM8

   ____________________ (BUTTON)

     *
     * Search
     * Our Impact
     * About
     * Donate

   Close   X

     * About Us
          + History
          + Staff
          + Board of Directors
          + Fellowships & Internships
          + Scholarships
          + Careers
     * Our Impact
          + Criminal Justice
               o View All
               o Abuse of Police Discretion
               o Capital Punishment
               o Fair Sentencing
               o Juvenile Life Without Parole
               o Police Accountability
               o The War on Drugs
          + Economic Justice
               o View All
               o Access to Justice
               o Criminal Records
               o Employment Discrimination
               o Environmental Justice
               o Fair Housing and Lending
               o Health Care
               o Housing Discrimination
               o Marriage Equality
               o Minority Business Discrimination
               o Transportation Justice
          + Education
               o View All
               o Desegregation
               o Educational Equity
               o School Integration
               o School to Prison Pipeline
          + Political Participation
               o View All
               o Barriers to Voting
               o Census
               o Felon Disfranchisement
               o Prepared to Vote
               o Prison-Based Gerrymandering
               o Redistricting
               o Voter Protection
               o Voting Rights Act
     * Case/Issue Search
     * Our Thinking
          + LDF Original Content
          + Issue Reports
          + Death Row USA: Death Penalty Cases and Statistics by State
     * Thurgood Marshall Institute
          + National Police Funding Database
          + Voting Rights 2022
     * News & Press
          + News
          + Press
          + Fact Sheets
          + LDF Brochures
          + LDF Flyers
     * Support
          + Donate
          + Other Ways to Give
          + Donors
          + Fiscal Responsibility
     * Events
          + National Equal Justice Awards Dinner
          + LDF Events
     * Donate
          + DONATE TODAY
          + Give Monthly
          + Tribute Gifts
          + Scholarship Gifts
     * Contact Us
          + Locations
          + Legal Assistance
          + Press Inquiries

How Racism in the Courtroom Produces Wrongful Convictions and Mass
Incarceration

By Ella Wiley

Senior Communications Associate

   In recent years, police violence and militarization have been under a
   microscope. For many Americans, it is now frighteningly clear that
   police consider Black people suspects when sitting in their backyards,
   failing to signal, and simply going about many daily life activities —
   and that this racial targeting too often results in callous abuses,
   unjust imprisonment, and senseless killings at law enforcement’s hands.
   Tragically, policing is only one of many racial discrimination pitfalls
   in America’s criminal justice system, merely representing the first
   step in a deeply problematic process.

   As the oldest civil rights legal organization in the United States, the
   Legal Defense Fund (LDF) is intimately familiar with this system’s
   failures. It cannot be overlooked how — in addition to vast racial
   disparities in policing, arrests, and detention — every stage of the
   criminal justice process following the filing of charges also
   contributes to the mass incarceration of Black people in this country.
   This piece will examine three major failures in court proceedings that
   often lead to unjust convictions and sentencing — and how LDF has
   confronted these failures over the years.

Discrimination in Juror Selection

   While some Americans may wonder why they are asked to perform jury
   duty, juries are an indispensable part of ensuring fairness in trials.
   Yet, although the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution promises a
   public trial by an impartial jury, this promise is a false one for many
   Black people charged with crimes.

   During jury selection — a process known as “voir dire” — both the
   prosecution and defense can strike potential jurors they believe are
   unfit to serve. Attorneys can justify a juror strike using several
   reasons, including citing biases that might cloud an individual’s
   ability to provide a fair verdict. These strikes are called challenges
   for cause. However, attorneys on each side are also given a set number
   of peremptory challenges where they are not required to explain why
   they’d like a specific juror struck from the roster. While peremptory
   challenges are limited, prosecutors often abuse this process to strike
   Black jurors — particularly when the defendant is Black — even though
   it’s illegal to strike a juror based on their race or ethnicity.

   In one of the most egregious and infamous examples of this kind of
   systemic discrimination, former Mississippi District Attorney Doug
   Evans struck Black jurors 4.4 times more frequently than white jurors
   over the course of his nearly 30-year career. Under Evans’ authority,
   defendant Curtis Flowers, who is Black, faced six trials for the same
   charge, each resulting in a hung jury or a reversed conviction due to
   prosecutorial misconduct. During those six trials, Evans removed 41 of
   42 potential Black jurors and struck them 20 times more frequently than
   white jurors.

   When Flowers’ case was brought to the Supreme Court, LDF filed an
   amicus brief condemning the exclusion of Black Americans from a crucial
   part of the democratic process. In 2019, the Supreme Court reversed
   Flowers’ conviction and condemned Evans’ use of racist peremptory
   strikes, instituting protections against striking potential jurors
   based on race.

   “The Flowers story is a powerful reminder that discrimination is alive
   and well in the criminal legal system right now. We cannot pretend it’s
   some sort of unfortunate chapter from American history that we’ve now
   moved beyond,” remarks LDF Deputy Director of Litigation Chris Kemmitt.
   “It continues to pervade our criminal legal system — and not just
   implicit bias, but open, naked racism.”

   Kemmitt adds, “The Flowers trials also illustrate just how important it
   is to stop prosecutors from using their peremptory challenges to target
   and remove Black prospective jurors. Even though the state’s evidence
   against Curtis Flowers was weak and unconvincing, every time the
   district attorney was able to remove all of the Black jurors or all but
   one of the Black jurors, the jury voted to convict despite the lack of
   evidence. But any time the jury had two or more Black jurors, some of
   those jurors followed the evidence and voted to acquit.”

“The Flowers story is a powerful reminder that discrimination is alive and
well in the criminal legal system right now. We cannot pretend it’s some sort
of unfortunate chapter from American history that we’ve now moved beyond. It
continues to pervade our criminal legal system — and not just implicit bias,
but open, naked racism.”

- Chris Kemmitt, LDF Deputy Director of Litigation

   Photo: Curtis Flowers leaves the Winston County jail with sisters
   Charita Baskin (left) and Priscilla Ward. (Photo by Hunter Hart for APM
   Reports)

Racism and Bias Among Jury Members

   While attorneys from both the defense and prosecution can strike
   potential jurors they believe hold biases that will prevent them from
   providing a fair verdict, many substantial biases either go undetected
   or, worse, are tolerated outright. There have been countless cases
   where a person of color was convicted of a crime, and it was later
   discovered that one or more jurors responsible for determining their
   innocence were racist. It is also important to note that the true
   number of cases where racism among jury members has resulted in an
   unfair conviction of a person of color is unknown.

   However, when they are known, LDF and other organizations work to
   reverse such convictions. In 2004, Andre Thomas, a Black man, killed
   his white wife and their two children during a schizophrenic episode.
   He also attempted to kill himself at the scene and subsequently gouged
   out both of his eyes. At Thomas’ capital trial, the jury had to assess
   his severe mental illness when considering his insanity defense and
   then decide whether he should be sentenced to death or life
   imprisonment. Despite the substantial impact that their decision would
   have on Thomas’ future, three jurors were allowed to serve after openly
   condemning interracial relationships, a bias that could’ve
   unquestionably impacted their decision. Thomas has been on death row
   ever since.

   In 2021, LDF filed a cert petition urging the Supreme Court to review
   Thomas’ conviction and jury discrimination claim. LDF’s petition
   detailed the Supreme Court’s precedent protecting against such biases
   in courtroom proceedings. It also emphasized that racial biases within
   the deliberation room cannot be tolerated because they undermine our
   nation’s promise for fair trials by an impartial jury. The Supreme
   Court has yet to make a decision on whether it will consider Thomas’
   case.

   “The Supreme Court has long recognized that overt racial bias has no
   place in our criminal justice system,” says LDF Assistant Counsel
   Santino Coleman. “When jurors in a criminal case openly express racial
   bias, it creates the unacceptable risk that racial prejudice will
   infect the jury’s deliberative process. This risk is uniquely harmful
   in capital cases where jurors’ racial biases may prevent them from
   fairly considering mitigating evidence at sentencing. This not only
   violates an accused person’s constitutional right to trial by an
   impartial jury, but erodes the legitimacy of the criminal justice
   system.”

“When jurors in a criminal case openly express racial bias, it creates the
unacceptable risk that racial prejudice will infect the jury’s deliberative
process. This risk is uniquely harmful in capital cases where jurors’ racial
biases may prevent them from fairly considering mitigating evidence at
sentencing. This not only violates an accused person’s constitutional right
to trial by an impartial jury, but erodes the legitimacy of the criminal
justice system.”

- Santino Coleman, LDF Assistant Counsel

   Photo: Anti-death penalty demonstrators in front of the U.S. Supreme
   Court in 1977. (Source: Getty)

Sentencing Disparities

   According to the Sentencing Project, 48% of people serving life or
   virtually life sentences are Black. Moreover, in 2017, the United
   States Sentencing Commission reported that Black men receive federal
   prison sentences that are nearly 20% longer than white men convicted of
   the same crime. Federal prosecutors are also twice as likely to charge
   Black people with offenses carrying a mandatory minimum sentence than
   their white counterparts.

   While there are many factors contributing to the extreme racial
   disparities in sentencing — and countless others that perpetuate vast
   disparities in arrests and detention — discretion, from both the
   judge’s bench and prosecutor’s office, contributes most to this gap. We
   must enact comprehensive federal legislation to limit sentencing
   discretion, diminish these disparities, and end our country’s mass
   incarceration of Black people. In 2018, LDF supported the First Step
   Act, which reduced mandatory minimum sentences for certain crimes,
   retroactively applied the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, and generally
   decreased the federal inmate population, among other changes.

   Still, further reform is critical. The risk-assessment tool created by
   the First Step Act and used to determine whether someone is eligible
   for release, for example, has been shown to produce racially disparate
   results. The First Step Act also limits how some of its provisions can
   be applied retroactively to those currently incarcerated. For many
   incarcerated individuals, this means they may continue to serve harsh
   sentences for crimes that now hold lesser punishments.

   The above pitfalls are just a few examples of how our criminal justice
   system repeatedly fails Black people. In each step of the process,
   racial bias seeps into decisions made by prosecutors, jurors, and
   judges — decisions that all profoundly impact a person’s life. This
   bias undermines the very fabric and premise of our democracy and,
   unless it is eliminated, no trial will ever be impartial. As a result,
   LDF and other advocacy organizations remain ever vigilant in working to
   comprehensively reform the criminal justice system and render it truly
   fair and impartial.

Published: July 20, 2022

LDF Case

Attala County NAACP v. Evans

Filed: November 2019

   Attala County NAACP v. Evans was filed on the heels of Flowers v.
   Mississippi, a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning District Attorney
   Doug Evans’ efforts to exclude Black people from jury service in the
   case of Curtis Flowers, a Black man, who was sentenced to death by a
   nearly all-white jury. Attala County NAACP  v. Evans seeks to end
   Evans’ and his office’s racially discriminatory jury selection
   practices and ensure that Black prospective jurors enjoy the same
   democratic rights as the white citizens in his district.
   Read More

LDF Case

Buck v. Davis

Filed: December 2012

   One of LDF’s most high profile death penalty cases in recent memory,
   Buck v. Davis challenged the death sentence of Texas death row inmate
   Duane Buck, whose death sentence was a blatant product of racial
   discrimination. Mr. Buck’s own attorney introduced testimony in the
   sentencing phase of his trial that he was more likely to be dangerous
   solely because he is Black. LDF argued before the Supreme Court that
   the rule of law demands a new sentencing hearing free from racial bias.
   The Supreme Court granted Mr. Buck a new hearing and he was later
   resentenced.
   Read More

Death Row USA

   LDF issues a quarterly report entitled Death Row USA that contains
   death row populations by state and other statistics pertaining to
   capital punishment. For decades, LDF has been a pioneering voice in the
   fight to abolish capital punishment and eliminate racial discrimination
   from the court system. In our landmark 1972 case, Furman v. Georgia,
   LDF won the country’s first and only nationwide halt to executions when
   the Supreme Court struck down capital punishment.
   Read More

     * About Us
     * Our Impact
     * Case/Issue Search
     * Our Thinking
     * LDF Original Content
     * Thurgood Marshall Institute
     * National Police Funding Database
     * News & Press
     * Support
     * Events
     * Contact Us

   Donate

LDF Microsites

   Defend Diversity
   Voting Rights 2022
   LDF Blog
     *
     *
     *
     *

National Headquarters

   (212)-965-2200

Washington D.C. Office

   (202) 682-1300

   © Copyright 2022 NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.
     * Privacy Policy
     * Legal Disclaimer and General Information

   Shares

Share

   Blogger
   Delicious
   Digg
   Email
   Facebook
   Facebook messenger
   Google
   Hacker News
   Line
   LinkedIn
   Mix
   Odnoklassniki
   PDF
   Pinterest
   Pocket
   Print
   Reddit
   Renren
   Short link
   SMS
   Skype
   Telegram
   Tumblr
   Twitter
   VKontakte
   wechat
   Weibo
   WhatsApp
   Xing
   Yahoo! Mail

Copy short link

   ____________________Copy link
