   #Pew Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends Project » Feed Pew
   Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends Project » Comments Feed
   alternate alternate alternate JSON Representation Prism XML Version
   Plain Text Version

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MVFJNW

   Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World
   Newsletters Press Donate My Account

   Pew Research Center Logo

   Read our research on: Economy | Russia | COVID-19
   Pew Research Center Logo
   ____________________ (BUTTON)

   Research Topics
   All PublicationsMethodsShort ReadsTools & ResourcesExpertsAbout

Topics

   Politics & PolicyInternational AffairsImmigration & MigrationRace &
   EthnicityReligionGenerations & AgeGender & LGBTQ
   Family & RelationshipsEconomy & WorkScienceInternet & TechnologyNews
   Habits & MediaMethodological ResearchFull topic list

Regions & Countries

   Asia & the PacificEurope & RussiaLatin AmericaMiddle East & North
   AfricaNorth AmericaSub-Saharan AfricaMultiple Regions / Worldwide

Formats

   FeaturesFact SheetsVideosData Essays

   Research Topics

Topics

   Politics & PolicyInternational AffairsImmigration & MigrationRace &
   EthnicityReligionGenerations & AgeGender & LGBTQFamily &
   RelationshipsEconomy & WorkScienceInternet & TechnologyNews Habits &
   MediaMethodological ResearchFull topic list

Regions & Countries

   Asia & the PacificEurope & RussiaLatin AmericaMiddle East & North
   AfricaNorth AmericaSub-Saharan AfricaMultiple Regions / Worldwide

Formats

   FeaturesFact SheetsVideosData Essays
   All PublicationsMethodsShort ReadsTools & ResourcesExpertsAboutMy
   Account
   DONATE
   ____________________ (BUTTON)

   Read our research on: Economy | Russia | COVID-19
   Home Research Topics Race & Ethnicity Racial Bias & Discrimination

   Pew Research CenterApril 9, 2019

Race in America 2019

Public has negative views of the country’s racial progress; more than half
say Trump has made race relations worse

   By Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Anna Brown and Kiana Cox
   (iStock photo)
   Most black adults have negative views about the country’s racial
   progress

   For updated findings on views about racial inequality in the U.S., see
   “Amid National Reckoning, Americans Divided on Whether Increased Focus
   on Race Will Lead to Major Policy Change.”

   More than 150 years after the 13th Amendment abolished slavery in the
   United States, most U.S. adults say the legacy of slavery continues to
   have an impact on the position of black people in American society
   today. More than four-in-ten say the country hasn’t made enough
   progress toward racial equality, and there is some skepticism,
   particularly among blacks, that black people will ever have equal
   rights with whites, according to a new Pew Research Center survey.

   Opinions about the current state of race relations – and President
   Donald Trump’s handling of the issue – are also negative. About
   six-in-ten Americans (58%) say race relations in the U.S. are bad, and
   of those, few see them improving. Some 56% think the president has made
   race relations worse; just 15% say he has improved race relations and
   another 13% say he has tried but failed to make progress on this issue.
   In addition, roughly two-thirds say it’s become more common for people
   to express racist views since Trump became president.

   Blacks are particularly gloomy about the country’s racial progress.
   More than eight-in-ten black adults say the legacy of slavery affects
   the position of black people in America today, including 59% who say it
   affects it a great deal. About eight-in-ten blacks (78%) say the
   country hasn’t gone far enough when it comes to giving black people
   equal rights with whites, and fully half say it’s unlikely that the
   country will eventually achieve racial equality.
   Nonwhites are more likely to see advantages in being white

   Americans see disadvantages for blacks and Hispanics in the U.S. A
   majority of all adults (56%) say being black hurts people’s ability to
   get ahead at least a little, and 51% say the same about being Hispanic.
   In contrast, 59% say being white helps people’s ability to get ahead.
   Views about the impact of being Asian or Native American are more
   mixed.

   Blacks, Hispanics and Asians are more likely than whites to say being
   white helps people’s ability to get ahead at least a little. Among
   whites, those who are more educated, as well as those who identify with
   or lean toward the Democratic Party, are particularly likely to see
   advantages to being white.

   The nationally representative survey of 6,637 adults was conducted
   online Jan. 22-Feb. 5, 2019, in English and Spanish, using Pew Research
   Center’s American Trends Panel.^1 In addition to exploring the public’s
   views about the state of race relations and racial inequality in
   America, the survey also looks at personal experiences with racial and
   ethnic discrimination and the role race plays in people’s lives. Among
   the report’s key findings:

Most Americans say it’s now more common for people to express racist or
racially insensitive views; more than four-in-ten say it’s more acceptable

   Most say it’s now more common for people to express racist or racially
   insensitive views

   Most Americans (65%) – including majorities across racial and ethnic
   groups – say it has become more common for people to express racist or
   racially insensitive views since Trump was elected president. A smaller
   but substantial share (45%) say this has become more acceptable.

   Democrats and those who lean Democratic are more likely than
   Republicans and Republican leaners to say it has become more common and
   more acceptable for people to express racist and racially insensitive
   views since Trump was elected president. Among Democrats, 84% say this
   is now more common and 64% say it’s more acceptable; fewer than half of
   Republicans say it has become more common (42%) and just 22% say it has
   become more acceptable for people to express these types of views.

Views of Trump’s handling of race relations are far more negative than views
of how Obama handled the issue

   A majority of U.S. adults say Trump has made race relations worse

   A majority of Americans (56%) say Trump has made race relations worse;
   just 15% say he has made progress toward improving race relations,
   while 13% say he has tried but failed to make progress and 14% say he
   hasn’t addressed this issue. In contrast, 37% say Barack Obama made
   progress on race relations when he was president, and 27% say he tried
   but failed.^2 A quarter of Americans say Obama made race relations
   worse. These retrospective views of Obama’s handling of race relations
   are nearly identical to views expressed during Obama’s last year in
   office.

   Not surprisingly, assessments of Trump’s and Obama’s handling of race
   relations differ considerably along partisan lines. Democrats
   overwhelmingly say Trump has made race relations worse (84%), including
   large shares of black (79%) and white (86%) Democrats. Views are more
   divided among Republicans. About a third of Republicans (34%) say Trump
   has improved race relations and 25% say he has tried but failed to make
   progress; 19% of Republicans say he hasn’t addressed the issue, while
   20% say he has made race relations worse.

   When it comes to views of Obama’s handling of race relations, 55% of
   Democrats say he improved race relations during his presidency; just 8%
   say he made things worse. In contrast, 51% of Republicans say Obama
   made race relations worse, while 14% say he made progress toward
   improving it. As is the case with views of Trump’s handling of race
   relations, white and black Democrats offer somewhat similar assessments
   of how Obama handled this issue when he was president.

Republicans and Democrats have vastly different views on race

   White Republicans, white Democrats differ widely in their views of the
   country’s racial progress

   In addition to being linked to views of Trump’s handling of race
   relations, partisanship is strongly associated with racial attitudes
   more broadly. In fact, after controlling for other factors,
   partisanship has a greater association with views about the country’s
   racial progress than demographic factors, though being young and more
   educated are also significant predictors, particularly among whites.^3

   Because whites and nonwhites often have widely different views of
   racial issues, and nonwhites disproportionately identify with or lean
   to the Democratic Party, gaps between Republicans and Democrats are
   often shown among whites in this report in order to account for
   differences in the racial composition of the two parties.^4

   White Democrats (64%) are far more likely than white Republicans (15%)
   to say the country hasn’t gone far enough when it comes to giving black
   people equal rights with whites. About half of Republicans say it’s
   been about right, while a sizable minority (31%) says the country has
   gone too far in this regard.

   Eight-in-ten white Democrats – vs. 40% of white Republicans – say the
   legacy of slavery continues to have an impact on black people’s
   position in American society today. And when it comes to views about
   racial discrimination, 78% of white Democrats say the bigger problem is
   people not seeing it where it really does exist, while a similar share
   of white Republicans say people seeing racial discrimination where it
   really does not exist is the bigger problem.

Blacks are more likely than other groups to say their race has had a negative
impact on their ability to get ahead; whites are the most likely to say their
race helped them

   About half of blacks say being black has hurt their ability to get
   ahead

   About half of black adults (52%) say being black has hurt their ability
   to get ahead at least a little, with 18% saying it has hurt a lot.
   About a quarter of Hispanics and Asians (24% each) and just 5% of
   whites say their race or ethnicity has had a negative impact. In turn,
   whites are more likely than other groups to say their racial background
   has helped them at least a little.

   Among blacks, those with at least some college experience are more
   likely than those with less education to say being black has hurt their
   ability to get ahead.

   Education is also linked with whites’ perceptions of the impact their
   race has had on their ability to get ahead. Small shares of whites
   across educational levels say their racial background has hurt their
   ability to succeed, but those with a bachelor’s degree are more likely
   than those with less education to say being white helped them at least
   a little.

   Across all racial and ethnic groups, more point to their own hard work
   than to any other attribute, including their race, their gender, the
   people they know or their family’s financial situation, as something
   that helped them get ahead.

Blacks, whites differ in assessments of why it may be harder for black people
to get ahead

   Blacks are far more likely than whites to say discrimination is a major
   obstacle for black people

   Whether or not they see their race as an obstacle for them personally,
   about two-thirds of blacks (68%) say being black generally hurts a
   person’s ability to get ahead in the country; 55% of whites say the
   same.

   Among those who say being black hurts a person’s ability to get ahead,
   blacks are far more likely than whites to point to racial
   discrimination, less access to high-paying jobs and less access to good
   schools as major reasons why this is the case. In turn, whites are more
   likely than blacks to point to family instability and lack of good role
   models as major obstacles for black people. The same shares in both
   groups (22%) say a lack of motivation to work hard is to blame.

   There are wide partisan gaps in these views. Most white Democrats who
   say being black hurts a person’s ability to succeed point to racial
   discrimination (70%) and less access to good schools (75%) or
   high-paying jobs (64%) as major reasons for this (among black
   Democrats, the shares are 86%, 74% and 78%, respectively). By
   comparison, about a third or fewer white Republicans say these are
   major obstacles for blacks. White Republicans are more likely than
   white Democrats to cite family instability, lack of good role models
   and a lack of motivation to work hard.

Majorities of black and white adults say blacks are treated less fairly than
whites in dealing with police and by the criminal justice system

   Whites and blacks differ widely in views of how blacks are treated

   Black and white adults have widely different perceptions of how blacks
   are treated in America, but majorities of both groups say blacks are
   treated less fairly than whites by the criminal justice system (87% of
   blacks vs. 61% of whites) and in dealing with police (84% vs. 63%,
   respectively).

   About six-in-ten blacks or more – but fewer than half of whites – say
   blacks are treated less fairly than whites in hiring, pay and
   promotions; when applying for a loan or mortgage; in stores or
   restaurants; when voting in elections; and when seeking medical
   treatment. In each of these realms, whites tend to say blacks and
   whites are treated about equally; very small shares say whites are
   treated less fairly than blacks.

   Across these different areas, there are gaps ranging from 39 to 53
   percentage points in how white Democrats and white Republicans see the
   treatment of blacks in the U.S. About half or more white Democrats say
   blacks are treated less fairly than whites in dealing with the police
   (88% vs. 43% of white Republicans); by the criminal justice system (86%
   vs. 39%); in hiring, pay and promotions (72% vs. 21%); when applying
   for a mortgage or loan (64% vs. 17%); in stores or restaurants (62% vs.
   16%); when voting in elections (60% vs. 7%); and when seeking medical
   treatment (48% vs. 9%).

   In some of these areas, black and white Democrats express similar
   views, but larger shares of black Democrats say black people are
   treated less fairly than whites in employment situations (86%), when
   applying for a loan or mortgage (78%), in stores or restaurants (73%),
   and when seeking medical treatment (61%).

Most Americans, including similar shares of whites and blacks, say it’s never
acceptable for a white person to use the N-word

   Black and white adults have similar views on use of the N-word

   Seven-in-ten U.S. adults say they, personally, think it’s never
   acceptable for a white person to use the N-word; 13% say this is rarely
   acceptable and about one-in-ten say it is always (3%) or sometimes (6%)
   acceptable for a white person to use the N-word. Roughly seven-in-ten
   whites and blacks say this is never acceptable.

   A smaller share of Hispanics (58%) say it’s never acceptable for a
   white person to use the N-word, but this is driven in part by the
   relatively large share of foreign-born Hispanics (28%) who say they are
   not sure whether it’s acceptable for a white person to use the N-word.
   Among Hispanics born in the U.S., 67% say this is never acceptable.

   When it comes to black people using the N-word, about four-in-ten
   adults – including similar shares of blacks and whites – say they,
   personally, think it is never acceptable; 15% say it is rarely
   acceptable and about a third say it’s always (13%) or sometimes (20%)
   acceptable for black people to use the N-word.

Most black adults say being black is extremely or very important to how they
think about themselves

   Blacks are more likely than other groups to see their race or ethnicity
   as central to their identity

   Blacks are more likely than Hispanics or Asians – and much more likely
   than whites – to say that their race is central to their identity.
   About three-quarters of black adults say being black is extremely (52%)
   or very (22%) important to how they think of themselves; 59% of
   Hispanics and 56% of Asians say being Hispanic or Asian, respectively,
   is at least very important to their overall identity, with about
   three-in-ten in each group saying it’s extremely important. In
   contrast, just 15% of whites say being white is very or extremely
   important to how they think of themselves; about two-thirds say it’s
   either only a little important (18%) or not important at all (47%).

   Whites and blacks younger than 30 are less likely than their older
   counterparts to say their race is at least very important to their
   overall identity. Some 64% of black adults ages 18 to 29 say being
   black is at least very important, compared with roughly three-quarters
   or more among older age groups. And while relatively few whites across
   age groups say being white is central to how they think about
   themselves, whites younger than 30 are among the least likely to say
   so.

   Among Hispanics, those born abroad are more likely than those born in
   the U.S. to say being Hispanic is at least very important to how they
   think of themselves (65% vs. 52%).

Majorities of blacks, Hispanics and Asians say they have experienced
discrimination because of their race or ethnicity

   About three-quarters of blacks and Asians (76% of each) – and 58% of
   Hispanics – say they have experienced discrimination or have been
   treated unfairly because of their race or ethnicity at least from time
   to time. In contrast, about two-thirds of whites (67%) say they’ve
   never experienced this.

   When asked about specific situations they may have experienced because
   of their race or ethnicity, blacks are considerably more likely than
   whites, Hispanics or Asians to say that people have acted as if they
   were suspicious of them; people have acted as if they thought they
   weren’t smart; they have been treated unfairly by an employer in
   hiring, pay or promotion; or they have been unfairly stopped by police.
   Hispanics and Asians are more likely than whites to say each of these
   have happened to them.

   Asians are more likely than any other group to say they have been
   subject to slurs or jokes because of their race or ethnicity. In turn,
   more whites than blacks, Hispanics or Asians say people have assumed
   they were prejudiced or racist; 45% of whites have had this experience.
   Most blacks say someone has acted suspicious of them or as if they
   weren’t smart

For Hispanics, skin color is associated with experiences with discrimination

   The survey asked black and Hispanic respondents to identify the skin
   tone that best resembles their own using a modified version of the
   Massey-Martin scale.^5 A multivariate analysis suggests that Hispanics
   with darker skin tones are more likely than those with lighter skin to
   say they have ever experienced discrimination or been treated unfairly
   because of their race or ethnicity.^6 Darker skin color is also
   associated with a higher likelihood among Hispanics of saying that –
   because of their race or ethnicity – people have acted as if they were
   suspicious of them, people have acted as if they thought they weren’t
   smart, they have been treated unfairly in employment situations, they
   have subject to slurs or jokes, and that they have feared for their
   safety.

   Among blacks, those with darker skin tones are more likely to say they
   have experienced racial discrimination generally, but skin color is not
   necessarily associated with having faced specific situations because of
   their race or ethnicity. In fact, for blacks, being male and having
   higher levels of education are more consistently associated with the
   specific forms of discrimination asked about in the survey.
   A note about the Asian sample
   (BUTTON)

   This survey includes an oversample of Asian respondents, for a total
   sample size of 332 Asians. The sample includes English-speaking Asians
   only and, therefore, may not be representative of the overall U.S.
   Asian population (66% of our weighted Asian sample was born in another
   country, compared with 78% of the U.S. Asian adult population overall).

   Despite this limitation, it is important to report the views of Asians
   on race relations and racial inequality, as well as their personal
   experiences with racial discrimination, as the U.S. Asian population is
   growing faster than any other major racial or ethnic group. Measuring
   the attitudes of Asians on these topics is an important piece in
   understanding the state of race in America today.

   As always, Asians’ responses are incorporated into the general
   population figures throughout this report; data are weighted to be
   representative of the U.S. adult population as a whole. Asians are
   shown as a separate group when the question was asked of the full
   sample. Because of the relatively small sample size and a reduction in
   precision due to weighting, results are not shown separately for Asians
   for questions that were only asked of a random half of respondents
   (Form 1/Form 2) or some filtered questions. We are also not able to
   analyze Asian respondents by demographic categories, such as gender,
   age or education.
   Terminology
   (BUTTON)

   References to whites, blacks and Asians include only those who are
   non-Hispanic and identify as only one race. Hispanics are of any race.

   All references to party affiliation include those who lean toward that
   party: Republicans include those who identify as Republicans and
   independents who say they lean toward the Republican Party, and
   Democrats include those who identify as Democrats and independents who
   say they lean toward the Democratic Party.

   References to college graduates or people with a college degree
   comprise those with a bachelor’s degree or more. “Some college”
   includes those with an associate degree and those who attended college
   but did not obtain a degree. “High school” refers to those who have a
   high school diploma or its equivalent, such as a General Education
   Development (GED) certificate.

   Foreign born refers to people born outside of the United States, Puerto
   Rico or other U.S. territories to parents neither of whom was a U.S.
   citizen, regardless of legal status.

   U.S. born refers to individuals who are U.S. citizens at birth,
   including people born in the United States, Puerto Rico or other U.S.
   territories, as well as those born elsewhere to parents who were U.S.
   citizens.

   This report has been corrected to address an error in the
   classification of Asian respondents. In this corrected report, Asian
   estimates are based on 332 respondents who self-identified as Asian or
   Asian American only. An earlier version of this report provided Asian
   estimates based on 355 respondents, which properly included the 332
   single-race Asian respondents but also included 23 respondents who
   identified as Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander or both Asian
   and Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander. This correction did not
   affect any of the substantive conclusions of the study. Some estimates
   for Asians changed by 1 to 3 percentage points.
   Next: 1. How Americans see the state of race relations
   ← Prev Page
   You are reading page1Page2Page3Page4Page5Page6
   Next Page →
    1. The survey includes an oversample of blacks, Hispanics and Asians.
       For more details, see the Methodology section of the report. ↩
    2. The question on Trump’s handling of race relations was asked on
       both telephone and online surveys in 2019 and no significant mode
       differences were found. The numbers reported here are from the
       online survey. The retrospective question on Obama’s handling of
       race relations was asked only on a phone survey in 2019 and is
       compared with a 2016 phone survey. ↩
    3. This analysis is based on a series of logistic regressions and
       includes measures of partisanship, race, age, education and gender.
       ↩
    4. There aren’t enough black or Asian Republicans in the sample to
       compare the views of these groups across parties. While there is
       some evidence of party differences among Hispanics, there aren’t
       enough Hispanic Republicans to analyze on some questions that were
       not asked of the full sample. ↩
    5. The skin tone scale developed by Douglas S. Massey and Jennifer A.
       Martin and used by many social scientists is an 11-point scale
       ranging from 0 (total absence of color) to 10 (darkest possible
       skin). This survey used a 5-point scale. See survey topline for the
       images used. ↩
    6. This analysis is based on a series of logistic regressions. In
       addition to skin tone, the regression models also controlled for
       respondents’ gender, age, education and region of the country. For
       Hispanics, the models also included whether they were born in the
       U.S. or in another country. ↩

   [weekly.svg]

Sign up for our weekly newsletter

   Fresh data delivered Saturday mornings

Report Materials

   Complete Report PDF Topline QuestionnaireInteractive Who shares your
   views on race? American Trends Panel Wave 43 Dataset

Table of Contents

   Race in America 2019
   1. How Americans see the state of race relations 2. Views of racial
   inequality 3. The role of race and ethnicity in Americans’ personal
   lives Acknowledgments Methodology

Related

   short read | Dec 10, 2021

America’s public school teachers are far less racially and ethnically diverse
than their students

   short read | Apr 21, 2021

One-third of Asian Americans fear threats, physical attacks and most say
violence against them is rising

   short read | Mar 18, 2021

Majorities of Americans see at least some discrimination against Black,
Hispanic and Asian people in the U.S.

   report | Oct 6, 2020

Amid National Reckoning, Americans Divided on Whether Increased Focus on Race
Will Lead to Major Policy Change

   short read | Sep 16, 2020

Support for Black Lives Matter has decreased since June but remains strong
among Black Americans

Topics

   Race & EthnicityPolicetopic,police-1Racial Bias & DiscriminationRace
   Relations

MOST POPULAR

   1
   Key facts about Title 42, the pandemic policy that has reshaped
   immigration enforcement at U.S.-Mexico border

   2
   Quiz: Where do you fit in the political typology?

   3
   Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income
   calculator

   4
   Global population projected to exceed 8 billion in 2022; half live in
   just seven countries

   5
   What the data says about gun deaths in the U.S.

   Pew Research Center
   1615 L St. NW, Suite 800
   Washington, DC 20036
   USA
   (+1) 202-419-4300 | Main
   (+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax
   (+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries
   Research Topics
   Politics & PolicyInternational AffairsImmigration & MigrationRace &
   EthnicityReligionGenerations & AgeGender & LGBTQ
   Family & RelationshipsEconomy & WorkScienceInternet & TechnologyNews
   Habits & MediaMethodological ResearchFull topic list
   Follow Us
   Email Newsletters Facebook Twitter Tumblr YouTube RSS

   About Pew Research Center Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact
   tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends
   shaping the world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic
   research, media content analysis and other empirical social science
   research. Pew Research Center does not take policy positions. It is a
   subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.
   Copyright 2022 Pew Research Center About Terms & Conditions Privacy
   Policy Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy Feedback Careers

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PV3D8Q7
