   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-5WJLJ37

   StudyCorgi.com Logo Free essays
   Search for: ____________________
   Close and clear the search form
   (BUTTON) Search
     * Tools
       Writing Tools
       Conclusion Generator Thesis Maker Reworder Rephraser Summary
       Generator Read My Paper Title Generator Title Page Generator
       Research Hypothesis Generator Research Question Maker Research
       Problem Generator
       Business Tools
       SWOT Analysis SOAR Analysis VRIO Analysis PESTEL Analysis Porter’s
       Five Forces
     * Blog
     * Writing Service

   (BUTTON) Open or close mobile menu
   StudyCorgi History
   Print Сite this

Racial and Class Discrimination in the History of the American South

   Topic: History Words: 1387 Pages: 5 Dec 16th, 2022

Introduction

   The American South became famous in world historiography due to extreme
   forms of slavery and discrimination from the white planter class. The
   peculiar way of life and plantation culture of the American South
   developed during the British colonization of North America and evolved
   after the country gained independence. The South of the USA includes,
   for the most part, the states that in 1861-1865 made up the Confederate
   States of America and opposed the North during the American Civil War.
   Our experts can deliver a customized essay
   tailored to your instructions
   for only $13.00 $11.05/page
   308 qualified specialists online
   Learn more

   The climate of the South made it possible to grow plantation crops.
   Before 1800, slave labor benefited tobacco, rice, sugarcane, indigo,
   and hemp growers^1. Agriculture demanded year-round work, which, with a
   shortage of labor from the 17th century, led to the use of the labor of
   Negro slaves. In this regard, in the southern English colonies in North
   America, plantation slavery, features of an aristocratic culture
   appeared, close to the landowning nobility in Europe. The North-South
   Civil War and the Civil Rights Movement are two events in the history
   of the American South caused by racial and class discrimination.

The Civil War

The Roles of Race and Class

   The key differences between the industrialized North and the agrarian
   South of the United States were further intensified in the early 19th
   century. The Industrial Revolution began in the North, and in the
   South, the invention of the cotton gin made cotton the main crop. The
   North quickly overtook the South in terms of population: by 1860,
   Southerners made up only a third of the US population. Focusing on the
   foreign market, the South, to maintain its slave system, took the
   extreme step of separating from the United States: in 1861, the
   Confederate States of America was proclaimed. This event sparked a
   civil war in which the South was defeated. After that, the so-called
   Reconstruction of the South was carried out, which lasted until 1877. A
   military administration was introduced in the southern states; most of
   the southern states were occupied for a long time, having almost no
   political rights.

   The American Civil War, also called the War of the North and the South,
   went down in history as the largest conflict on the American continent.
   The consensus of modern historians is that slavery was the chief cause
   of the Civil War^2. Free emigrants replenished the population of the
   northern states and the southern states by slaves imported from abroad.
   By the early 1860s, only a quarter of the population of the southern
   states had the right to vote. Southerners feared that with such
   dynamics, all controversial political issues in Congress would be
   decided in favor of the North because they had the majority of voice.

   All agriculture in the South was based on free slave labor, and
   unskilled factory slaves were inefficient. The industrialists of the
   North needed slavery to get free workers, so they advocated the
   abolition of slavery. In addition, for southern planters, this would
   mean the collapse of the entire economic system built. Besides, the
   moral side of the issue was also important: many public figures in
   America criticized slavery as an inhuman relic of the past and demanded
   its abolition.

Other Reasons

   In addition, the central government, located in the North, sought to
   extend influence to all states, while the Southern Territories wanted
   to maintain local self-government. The country’s entire industry was
   concentrated in the North, while cotton, sugarcane, tobacco, and other
   industrial crops were collected in the South. The Southern states
   supplied raw materials to the North for a long time, where local
   producers processed it and exported goods. However, at some point, the
   planters realized that it was much more profitable to trade with Europe
   without intermediaries. The manufacturers of the North were at risk of
   running out of supplies, and European ones were supplanting their goods
   in the South. Wanting to protect the domestic market, the government
   imposed huge taxes on trade with Europe, which caused discontent among
   the southerners.

The Civil Rights Movement

The Roles of Race and Class

   The Civil Rights Movement became a grassroots movement of black
   American citizens and white activists who supported them against racial
   discrimination in the 1950s and 1960s. In the southern states,
   centuries of slavery and decades of segregation have created a legal
   and political system characterized by white supremacy. There were laws
   according to which Afro-Americans could not study at schools and
   universities along with whites and had their system of schools and
   universities; they had to occupy specially designated places for them
   in public transport. Many shops, restaurants, hotels refused to serve
   blacks. The whites counted on their obedience; the resistance of the
   Afro-Americans seemed unthinkable. Many white southerners were
   convinced that Afro-Americans had taken on the role of second-class
   citizens, and they even liked it.
   On-Time Delivery! Get your 100% customized paper
   done in
   as little as 3 hours
   Let`s start

   The African American legal strategy culminated in the US Supreme Court
   in 1954, under the leadership of Earl Warren, which overturned many
   laws that allowed for racial segregation and discrimination. The
   movement began when the US Supreme Court concedes that segregation is
   wrong. ^3African Americans were re-entering politics in the South, and
   young people across the country were inspired to take action. From 1964
   to 1970, a wave of urban riots and protests in black communities
   weakened support from the white middle class, but support from private
   foundations increased. The emergence of the Black Power movement
   challenged the established black leadership for its cooperation and
   continued legalism and non-violence. Many popular ideas about the
   movement are linked to the racially discriminatory movement of Martin
   Luther King Jr., who was fighting racial inequality through nonviolent
   resistance.

Other Reasons

   Two main causes drove the civil rights movement; discrimination and
   segregation of African Americans. Another reason for the rise of the
   movement can be called the economic superiority of the white population
   over the blacks. The starting point was the stereotypes entrenched in
   society that made strong racial discrimination possible. People’s
   discontent grew, given that a significant part of the population did
   not even have the right to vote, children could not study on an equal
   basis with others, discrimination even touched places on buses.

One Race or Class Has Been More Powerful than the Other

   Historically, the white race has always had economic and social
   superiority over the black race. However, racial and class superiority
   did not stop African Americans from fighting for their rights and
   making a difference. On the side of the oppressed population was the
   moral right to be considered equal to the other part of the population.
   This realization of the rightness of one’s actions led, for example, to
   the success of the Civil Rights Movement. Although the Civil War ended
   in defeat for the South, it set in motion a chain of societal changes
   that led African Americans to improve their position later on.

The Most Powerful in Driving the History of the American South

   The history of the American South was largely influenced by slavery.
   Oppression, cruelty, and discrimination led to a fierce struggle for
   the black population for their rights^4. Slavery radically influenced
   American South history and the development of the entire country. Four
   hundred years ago, the British brought the first African slaves to
   Virginia. This event marked the beginning of the British and American
   transatlantic slave trade. From 1619 to 1860, about 600 thousand
   African slaves were forcibly imported into the United States. By the
   middle of the 19th century, the number of black slaves in the United
   States had reached about 4 million people. Their exploitation played an
   important role in the development of American capitalism. Slavery in
   the United States was prohibited only in 1865, but for another 100
   years, segregation restrictions were in effect in the country:
   segregation restrictions were lifted only in the 1960s. The
   socio-economic consequences of the slave system in America are still
   being felt.

Conclusion

   Racial and class discrimination can be called the main driving force in
   the history of the American South. Discrimination was the main cause of
   the events described: the American Civil War and the Civil Rights
   Movement. There were other reasons, mostly behind the key differences
   between the industrial North and the agrarian South. Slavery can, in
   principle, be called the cause that influenced the course of the
   development of the United States as a whole. Even in modern society,
   echoes of this terrible oppression are heard.

Bibliography

   Annette Gordon-Reed. Racism in America: A Reader. United States:
   Harvard University Press, 2020.

   Hasan Kwame Jeffries, ed. Understanding and Teaching the Civil Rights
   Movement. United States: University of Wisconsin Press, 2019.
   We’ll deliver a custom paper tailored to your requirements.
   Cut 15% off your first order
   Use discount

   Lamphier, Peg A.., Welch, Rosanne. The Civil War on Film. United
   States: ABC-CLIO, 2020.

   Reynolds, Donna. The Civil War. United States: Cavendish Square
   Publishing LLC, 2020.

Footnotes

     * 1-Lamphier, Peg A.., Welch, Rosanne. The Civil War on Film. United
       States: ABC-CLIO, 2020, 17.
     * 2-Reynolds, Donna. The Civil War. United States: Cavendish Square
       Publishing LLC, 2020, 14.
     * 3-Hasan Kwame Jeffries, ed. Understanding and Teaching the Civil
       Rights Movement. United States: University of Wisconsin Press,
       2019.
     * 4-Annette Gordon-Reed. Racism in America: A Reader. United States:
       Harvard University Press, 2020, 20.

   Omar Nelson Bradley in American Military History
   The Rise and Fall of Rome – History of the Roman Empire

Cite this paper

   Select style
   Select citation styles [APA-6________]
     * APA-6
     * APA-7
     * MLA-9
     * Chicago (N-B)
     * Chicago (A-D)
     * Harvard

   Reference

   StudyCorgi. (2022, December 16). Racial and Class Discrimination in the
   History of the American South. Retrieved from
   https://studycorgi.com/racial-and-class-discrimination-in-the-history-o
   f-the-american-south/

   Reference

   StudyCorgi. (2022, December 16). Racial and Class Discrimination in the
   History of the American South.
   https://studycorgi.com/racial-and-class-discrimination-in-the-history-o
   f-the-american-south/

   Work Cited

   "Racial and Class Discrimination in the History of the American South."
   StudyCorgi, 16 Dec. 2022,
   studycorgi.com/racial-and-class-discrimination-in-the-history-of-the-am
   erican-south/.
   * Hyperlink the URL after pasting it to your document

   1. StudyCorgi. "Racial and Class Discrimination in the History of the
   American South." December 16, 2022.
   https://studycorgi.com/racial-and-class-discrimination-in-the-history-o
   f-the-american-south/.

   Bibliography

   StudyCorgi. "Racial and Class Discrimination in the History of the
   American South." December 16, 2022.
   https://studycorgi.com/racial-and-class-discrimination-in-the-history-o
   f-the-american-south/.

   References

   StudyCorgi. 2022. "Racial and Class Discrimination in the History of
   the American South." December 16, 2022.
   https://studycorgi.com/racial-and-class-discrimination-in-the-history-o
   f-the-american-south/.

   References

   StudyCorgi. (2022) 'Racial and Class Discrimination in the History of
   the American South'. 16 December.
   Powered by CiteChimp - the best paper citation generator
   Copy to clipboard

   This paper was written and submitted to our database by a student to
   assist your with your own studies. You are free to use it to write your
   own assignment, however you must reference it properly.

   If you are the original creator of this paper and no longer wish to
   have it published on StudyCorgi, request the removal.
   3 hours!
   Clock image
   We’ll write a 100% customized paper this fast!
   Learn more
   Related Free Essays
   Voting Rights in America to 1877
   Dec 16th, 2022
   Wiesel’s Holocaust Experiences
   Dec 14th, 2022
   Roman Road Southeast of the Forum at Corinth
   Dec 14th, 2022
   Socio-Economic Consequences of the Great War in the United States
   Dec 14th, 2022
   Kalokagathia Perspectives in Ancient Greece
   Dec 14th, 2022
   Umayyad, Abbasid, and Fatimid Caliphates’ History
   Dec 14th, 2022
   Civil Rights Movements in America
   Dec 13th, 2022
   Analysis of American Special Features
   Dec 13th, 2022
   Check the price of your paper
   Cookies
   Our site uses cookies. If you keep using the site, you accept our
   Cookies Policy
   (BUTTON) OK
     * Writing Service
     * About
     * FAQ
     * Contact
     * Careers
     * Content Removal

     * Donate a Paper
     * Study Blog
     * Essay Topics
     * Free Writing Tools
     * Conclusion Generator
     * Thesis Maker

     * Essay Reworder
     * Online Plagiarism Checker
     * Essay Rephraser
     * Summary Generator
     * Read My Paper
     * Research Title Generator

     * DMCA.com Protection Status DMCA.com Protection Status
     * Trusted Site Trusted Site
     * Comodo Comodo

     * Twitter
     * Pinterest
     * Youtube

   Company:
   :
   Address:
   , , , . . , ,
   Contact:
   +1-888-881-3158
   [email protected]
   Privacy & Cookies Policy
   Terms and Conditions
   © 2022 StudyCorgi.com
   Disclaimer: Services provided by StudyCorgi are to be used for research
   purposes only. If you use an assignment from StudyCorgi website, it
   should be referenced accordingly.
