   Skip to main content Accessibility

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-N35NCMF

   Search splcenter.org ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   Home
   Donate Menu
     * Resources
          + Features and Stories
          + Extremist Files
          + Hatewatch
          + Year in Hate & Extremism
          + Case Docket
          + Guides
          + Publications
          + Southeast Immigrant Freedom Initiative
     * What We Do
          + Fighting Hate
               o Extremist Files
               o Hate Map
          + Learning for Justice
          + Seeking Justice
          + Civil Rights Memorial
               o The Experience
               o Curriculum
               o Visit Us
     * Our Issues
          + Hate & Extremism
          + Children's Rights
          + Immigrant Justice
               o Family Separation
               o Rights of Asylum Seekers
               o Local Policing and Immigration Enforcement
               o Guest Workers
               o Southeast Immigrant Freedom Initiative
          + LGBTQ Rights
               o Conversion Therapy
               o LGBTQ Youth Rights
          + Economic Justice
               o Request for Legal Assistance — Economic Justice
          + Criminal Justice Reform
          + Voting Rights
               o Our Future, Our Vote
               o Voting Rights - AL
               o Voting Rights - FL
               o Voting Rights - GA
               o Voting Rights - LA
               o Voting Rights - MS
               o Federal Resources and Amicus Briefs
     * Hatewatch
     * Hate Map
          + Anti-Government Groups
     * Podcast
     * Donate
     * Search

     * Instagram
     * Facebook
     * Twitter
     * About Us
     * Accessibility
     * Press Center
     * Ways to Give
     * Donate

   Search splcenter.org ____________________ (BUTTON) Search
   Features and Stories

UN Report: US fails to implement terms of treaty on eliminating racial
discrimination

   September 09, 2022
   Lisa Borden
   Lisa Borden
   Senior Policy Counsel for International Advocacy

   A United Nations committee that is reviewing U.S. compliance with an
   international treaty on racial discrimination has issued findings that
   should be seen as a serious rebuke and wakeup call for the Biden
   administration.

   The final report of the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial
   Discrimination (CERD), issued on Aug. 30, criticized the systemic and
   longstanding failure of the U.S. to take compliance with the treaty
   seriously and to develop mechanisms to integrate its goals into
   domestic policy.

   In its concluding observations and recommendations regarding the U.S.,
   the committee raised significant concerns about compliance with nearly
   every aspect of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
   Forms of Racial Discrimination.

   Especially noteworthy was CERD’s focus on issues contained in specific
   recommendations that the Southern Poverty Law Center submitted to the
   committee earlier in August. These issues included hate and extremism
   as well as racial disparities in voting, health care, education, the
   criminal legal system and immigration.

   The SPLC went to Geneva, Switzerland, as part of a coalition of more
   than 70 advocates from U.S.-based nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
   to provide documentation to CERD of ongoing racial discrimination and
   disparities in the U.S. We submitted three reports in advance of the
   review and traveled with a delegation that included two formerly
   incarcerated people who shared their experiences with committee
   members.

   We’re pleased that CERD embraced many of our policy recommendations on
   the issues we raised. We will now work with coalition partners to urge
   the Biden administration to translate those recommendations into
   concrete policy changes.

   At the same time, it’s deeply troubling that the U.S. has not done more
   to implement the treaty, the oldest of nine core international human
   rights accords. The U.S. has ratified only three of the nine. The U.S.
   signed the treaty on racial discrimination in 1966 but did not ratify
   it until 1994.

General failure to implement the treaty

   At the outset, the committee reiterated concerns it had expressed in
   past reviews about the continued failure of the U.S. to incorporate the
   treaty into domestic law and policy, specifically mentioning its
   notable absence from President Joe Biden’s Executive Order on Advancing
   Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
   Federal Government.

   The SPLC has repeatedly raised this issue, not only in our reports to
   CERD but also directly to various U.S. officials.

   Even though the U.S. has signed and ratified the treaty, Congress has
   never taken any steps to incorporate its requirements into U.S.
   legislation, and no administration has made an effort to do the same
   when developing and implementing domestic policy. This means that the
   treaty is in force on paper, but any instance of compliance with its
   requirements is merely coincidental.

   The committee also regretted the continued failure of the United States
   to create a national human rights institution (NHRI) or any similar
   coordinating mechanism to monitor implementation of the treaty.
   Additionally, the committee lamented the continued absence of a
   comprehensive national action plan to combat systemic racism and
   structural discrimination. It urged the U.S. to proceed on both fronts.

   The U.S. has long declined to establish any federal mechanism to
   coordinate and monitor implementation of any of its international human
   rights treaty obligations, claiming that agency-level oversight of
   related domestic laws and regulations is sufficient. That claim is
   clearly mistaken, given the results of CERD’s review and the failure of
   the federal government to even consider these treaties when fashioning
   domestic policy.

   Notably, a White House representative who was part of the president’s
   Geneva delegation told the committee during the review that the
   administration would consider proceeding with a study of how best to
   create an NHRI – a welcome departure from the intentions expressed by
   the administration during pre-review consultations, when the same
   person told NGO representatives that there were no plans to pursue
   this.

   The committee also recommended that the U.S. consult with NGOs
   regarding the creation and implementation of a national action plan to
   combat systemic racism and structural discrimination.

Hate and extremism

   Unique among the nations, hate speech in the United States is broadly
   protected by the First Amendment.

   The committee raised its perennial concerns about this and recommended
   action to confront the prevalence of hate speech, including by public
   officials and politicians, and to establish mechanisms to collect data
   on hate incidents (something the SPLC has supported).

   The committee also raised concerns about the increased activity of
   white supremacists and violent extremist groups. While recognizing the
   important progress made by the enactment of the COVID-19 Hate Crimes
   Act (legislation that authorizes incentive grants to spark improved
   local and state hate crime training, prevention, best practices and
   data collection initiatives), the committee echoed SPLC concerns about
   consistent underreporting of hate crimes and recommended establishing a
   comprehensive data collection system that is either mandatory or that
   conditions federal funding on credible participation – a recommendation
   we had made to the committee in our submission.

   The SPLC’s recommendations in this arena likely contributed to the
   committee’s own, unusually strong and specific proposals for action.
   What’s more, the committee recommended mandatory hate crime training
   for all law enforcement officials.

Voting rights

   Threats to voting rights are a major source of concern for the SPLC and
   have been the focus of several of our submissions to international
   human rights bodies, including CERD.

   The committee expressed concerns about the prevalence of state voter
   suppression laws and provided a laundry list of specific suppression
   measures that need attention, all of which had been addressed in our
   report. It recommended restoring the Voting Rights Act and taking other
   measures, including federal legislation, to eliminate unreasonable
   restrictions on the right to vote.

   Echoing concerns that were also addressed in a statement by our
   community partner Page Dukes, a member of the SPLC delegation, the
   committee specifically recommended steps to ensure that people
   convicted of felonies have their voting rights restored upon completion
   of their incarceration and that the federal government review state
   laws that provide for the automatic disenfranchisement of those who are
   incarcerated.

Prisons

   The committee raised concerns about the continued overrepresentation of
   racial and ethnic minorities in the prison population and specifically
   about their being disproportionately held in solitary confinement for
   long periods of time. SPLC community partner Terrance Winn, also a
   member of the SPLC delegation, told the committee of being locked up in
   solitary confinement numerous times at Angola prison in Louisiana
   during his 30-year incarceration.

   Further reflecting Winn’s testimony, the committee raised concerns
   about prison labor practices, especially the lack of adequate pay and
   other labor protections.

   It also addressed the disproportionate impact of collateral
   consequences including housing, employment and access to government
   benefits, and expressed concerns about the prosecution of juveniles in
   adult courts. The committee recommended strict limitations on the use
   of solitary confinement in line with the U.N.’s Mandela Rules, which
   provide standards for the treatment of incarcerated people, and urged
   full compliance with the Mandela Rules on prison labor.

Health care

   In alignment with our submission on racial disparities in health care,
   the committee expressed concerns about lack of access to adequate
   health care in states that did not expand Medicaid, recommending
   expanded coverage programs to ensure that everyone has such access.

   Our submission to the committee on health care disparities also
   included information on racially disparate maternal and infant
   mortality rates and the impact that the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision
   and state abortion restrictions will have on health and health care in
   the Deep South states where we work. We were pleased to see that that
   the committee raised the same concerns and urged measures to combat the
   racially disproportionate impact of these issues.

Immigration

   On migration issues, the committee expressed concerns about mandatory
   detention and detention conditions, including the lack of access to
   counsel, violence against undocumented migrants by immigration
   enforcement officers and disparate treatment of Black and Brown
   migrants.

   It recommended ending mandatory detention and criminal prosecution for
   illegal entry and ensuring due process and access to counsel. The
   committee also raised concerns about impunity for abuses against
   migrants by U.S. immigration enforcement officers and recommended that
   the U.S. undertake measures to prevent and to properly investigate and
   provide accountability for improper uses of force.

Education

   As reflected in the SPLC’s submission, the committee stated concerns
   about state-level measures to prohibit school instruction about race,
   discrimination, privilege and oppression, and about book banning and
   intimidation of teachers and school administrators. It recommended that
   the U.S. take all measures necessary to ensure that human rights
   education, including race discrimination and the history of slavery and
   colonialism, is part of all school curricula, and to afford adequate
   protections for educators from harassment, intimidation and violence.

   In addition, the committee echoed the concerns raised in our
   recommendations about education funding disparities and private school
   voucher programs that are exacerbating racial segregation in schools
   around the country.

   It was also concerned about racially disproportionate school discipline
   and policing.

   The committee recommended development of a comprehensive national plan
   on socioeconomic and racial school segregation, along with measures to
   pressure states to address funding disparities and to combat school
   discipline and juvenile justice disparities.

What comes next

   Following the review, the committee recommended that the U.S. continue,
   and increase, its consultations with civil society organizations such
   as the SPLC and other human rights-oriented NGOs.

   The SPLC and other NGOs will press the administration to begin this
   process quickly and to ensure that it is much more substantive than it
   has been in the past.

   As part of the review process, the committee identified some of its
   recommendations – involving maternal and reproductive health, the
   rights of Indigenous people and the rights of migrants – to be the
   subject of follow-up reporting by the U.S. in one year.

   Given the dire threats to voting rights and the urgency of addressing
   them, we had hoped that voting rights would be a part of the one-year
   follow-up. But it’s difficult to decide which fires should be
   extinguished first, and these are all vitally important issues.

   The next regular periodic report, which will begin the review process
   again, is to be submitted by Nov. 20, 2025. Until then, there is much
   to be done to begin the long overdue process of meaningful
   implementation of the treaty.

   Picture at top: Despite signing the International Convention on the
   Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination in 1966, the U.S. has
   failed to incorporate the treaty's requirements into domestic policy,
   according to a U.N. committee's new report. (Credit: iStock/Nobilior
   and Arqam Nasir)
     * Home
     * Facebook
     * Twitter
     * Instagram

   SPLC is a nonprofit, tax-exempt 501(c)(3) organization (EIN:
   63-0598743)
   The Southern Poverty Law Center

   400 Washington Avenue

   Montgomery, AL 36104
   The Civil Rights Memorial Center
   Learn More
     * About Us
          + Press Center
          + Our History
          + Board of Directors
          + Leadership
          + State Offices
          + Careers
          + Open RFPs
          + Financial Information
          + Accessibility Statement
          + Privacy & Terms
          + Contact Us
          + Press Inquiries

     * Support Us
          + Friends of the Center
          + Planned Giving
          + Gifts of Stock and Securities
          + Create Your Will For Free
          + Gifts from your IRA
          + Employer Matching
          + Other Ways of Giving
          + Peer-to-Peer Fundraising
          + Donor Resources

     * Resources
          + Features and Stories
          + Case Docket
          + #ReportHate
          + Extremist Files
          + Hatewatch
          + Intelligence Report
          + Publications
          + Activist Toolkits
